CASE: D.K. Basu v State of West Bengal (1997)
SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/501198/

[Cites
27
, Cited by
2221
]
Supreme Court of India
Shri D.K. Basu,Ashok K. Johri vs State Of West Bengal,State Of U.P on 18 December, 1996
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 610, 1997 AIR SCW 233, 1997 (1) SCC 416, 1998 CALCRILR 45, (1997) 13 OCR 214, (1997) 1 CURCRIR 81, 1997 SRILJ 236, (1997) 1 ALLCRILR 417, 1997 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 204, (1997) 1 RECCRIR 372, (1997) SC CR R 371, (1997) 2 EASTCRIC 391, (1997) 2 GUJ LR 1631, (1998) 2 ORISSA LR 556, (1997) 1 RAJ LW 94, 1997 UP CRIR 136, (1997) 1 CRICJ 165, (1997) 21 ALLCRIR 277, 1998 BLJR 1 161, (1996) 4 CRIMES 233, (1997) 1 JT 1 (SC), 1997 SCC (CRI) 92, (1997) 2 BOM CR 666, AIRONLINE 1996 SC 935
Author:
Kuldip Singh
Bench:
Kuldip Singh
PETITIONER:
SHRI D.K. BASU,ASHOK K. JOHRI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF WEST BENGAL,STATE OF U.P.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	18/12/1996

BENCH:
KULDIP SINGH, A.S. ANAND




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
WITH
WRIT PETITION (CRL) NO. 592 OF 1987
		      J U D G M E N T
DR. ANAND, J.
The  Executive   Chairman,	 Legal	Aid  Services,	West
Bengal, a  non-political organisation  registered under	 the
Societies Registration Act
, on 26th August, 1986 addressed a
letter to  the Chief  Justice of India drawing his attention
to certain  news items	published in the Telegraph dated 20,
21 and	22 of  July, 1986  and in  the Statesman  and  India
express dated  17th August,  1986 regarding deaths in police
lock-ups  and	custody.  The	Executive   Chairman   after
reproducing the	 new items  submitted that it was imperative
to examine  the issue  in  depth  and  to  develop  "custody
jurisprudence"	and   formulate	 modalities   for   awarding
compensation to	 the victim  and/or family  members  of	 the
victim for  attrocities and  death caused  in police custody
and to	provide for  accountability of the efforts are often
made to	 hush up  the matter  of lock-up deaths and thus the
crime goes  unpunished and  "flourishes". It  was  requested
that the   letter  alongwith the  new items  be treated as a
writ petition under "public interest litigation" category.
Considering the  importance of  the issue raised in the
letter being  concerned	 by  frequent  complaints  regarding
custodial violence  and deaths in police lock up, the letter
was treated  as a  writ petition  and notice  was issued  on
9.2.1987 to the respondents.
In response  to the  notice, the  State of	 West Bengal
filed a	 counter. It  was maintained  that the police was no
hushing up  any matter	of lock-up  death and that whereever
police personnel  were found  to  be  responsible  for	such
death,	action	 was  being   initiated	 against  them.	 The
respondents characterised the writ petition as misconceived,
misleading and untenable in law.
While the	writ  petition	was  under  consideration  a
letter addressed by Shri Ashok Kumar Johri on 29.7.87 to the
Hon'ble Chief Justice of India drawing the attention of this
Court to the death of one Mahesh Bihari of Pilkhana, Aligarh
in police custody was received. That letter was also treated
as a  writ petition  and was directed to be listed alongwith
the writ petition filed by Shri D.K. Basu. On 14.8.1987 this
Court made the following order :
"In almost	 every states  there are
     allegations and  these  allegations
     are now  increasing in frequency of
     deaths   in    custody    described
     generally by  newspapers as lock-up
     deaths. At	 present there	does not
     appear  to	  be  any  machinery  to
     effectively    deal    with    such
     allegations. Since	 this is  an all
     India   question	concerning   all
     States, it	 is desirable  to issues
     notices   to    all    the	   State
     Governments  to  find  out	 whether
     they are  desire to say anything in
     the matter.  Let notices  issue  to
     all  the	State  Governments.  Let
     notice  also   issue  to	the  Law
     Commission of  India with a request
     that suitable  suggestions	 may  be
     returnable	 in   two  months   from
     today."
In response  to the  notice, affidavits have been filed
on behalf  of the  States  of  West  Bengal,  Orissa,  Assam
Himachal Pradesh,  Madhya  Pradesh,  Harayana,	Tamil  Nadu,
Meghalaya ,  Maharashtra and  Manipur. Affidavits  have also
been filed  on behalf  of Union	 Territory of Chandigarh and
the Law Commission of India.
During the course of hearing of the writ petitions, the
Court felt  necessity of  having assistance from the Bar and
Dr. A.M.  Singhvi, senior  advocate was	 requested to assist
the Court as amicus curiae.
Learned counsel  appearing for different States and Dr.
Singhvi, as  a friend  of the court. presented the case ably
and though  the effort	on the	part of the States initially
was  to	  show	that  "everything  was	well"  within  their
respective States,  learned counsel  for the parties, as was
expected of  them in  view of  the importance  of the  issue
involved, rose	above their  respective briefs	and rendered
useful assistance  to this Court in examining various facets
of the issue and made certain suggestions for formulation of
guidelines by  this  court  to	minimise,  if  not  prevent,
custodial violence  and kith  and kin  of those	 who die  in
custody on account of torture.
The Law  Commission of  India also	 in response  to the
notice issued  by this	Court forwarded	 a copy of the 113th
Report regarding  "injuries in	police custody and suggested
incorporation of Section 114-B in the
India Evidence Act
."
The importance  of affirmed rights of every human being
need no	 emphasis and,	therefore, to deter breaches thereof
becomes a  sacred duty	of the	Court, as  the custodian and
protector of  the fundamental  and the basic human rights of
the citizens.  Custodial  violence,  including	torture	 and
death in  the lock  ups, strikes  a blow at the Rule of Law,
which demands  that the	 powers of  the executive should not
only be	 derived from  law but	also that the same should be
limited by  law. Custodial  violence is a matter of concern.
It is aggravated by the fact that it is committed by persons
who are supposed to be the protectors of the citizens. It is
committed under	 the shield  of uniform and authority in the
four walls  of a police station or lock-up, the victim being
totally helpless.  The	protection  of	an  individual	from
torture and  abuse by  the police  and other  law  enforcing
officers is  a matter  of deep	concern in  a free  society.
These petitions	 raise important  issues  concerning  police
powers, including  whether monetary  compensation should  be
awarded for  established  infringement	of  the	 Fundamental
Rights guaranteed  by
Articles 21
and
22
of the Constitution
of India. The issues are fundamental.
"Torture" has  not been  defined in  Constitution or in
other penal  laws. 'Torture'  of a  human being	 by  another
human being  is essentially an instrument to impose the will
of the	'strong' over  the 'weak'  by  suffering.  The	word
torture today  has become  synonymous wit the darker side of
human civilisation.
"Torture is  a wound in the soul so
     painful  that   sometimes	you  can
     almost touch  it, but it is also so
     intangible that there is not way to
     heal   it.	  Torture   is	 anguish
     squeezing in  your chest,	cold  as
     ice and heavy as a stone paralyzing
     as sleep  and dark	 as  the  abyss.
Torture is	 despair  and  fear  and
     rage and  hate. It	 is a  desire to
     kill    and    destroy    including
     yourself."
     Adriana P. Bartow
No violation  of any  one of  the human rights has been
the subject  of so  many  Conventions  and  Declarations  as
'torture'- all	aiming at  total banning of it in all forms,
but inspite  of the  commitments made  to eliminate torture,
the fact  remains that	torture is  more widespread not that
ever before,  "Custodial torture"  is a	 naked violation  of
human dignity and degradation with destroys, to a very large
extent, the  individual	 personality.  IT  is  a  calculated
assault on  human dignity  and	whenever  human	 dignity  is
wounded, civilisation takes a step backward-flag of humanity
must on each such occasion fly half-mast.
In all  custodial crimes that is of real concern is not
only infliction	 of body  pain but  the mental agony which a
person undergoes  within the four walls of police station or
lock-up. Whether  it is	 physical assault  or rape in police
custody, the extent of trauma a person experiences is beyond
the purview of law.
"Custodial violence"  and abuse  of police power is not
only peculiar  to this country, but it is widespread. It has
been the  concern of  international  community	because	 the
problem is universal and the challenge is almost global. The
Universal Declaration  of Human Rights in 1984, which market
the emergency of worldwide trend of protection and guarantee
of certain  basic human rights, stipulates in
Article 5
that
"No one	 shall be  subjected to torture or to curel, inhuman
or degrading  treatment or  punishment." Despite  the  pious
declaration, the  crime	 continues  unabated,  though  every
civilised nation  shows its  concern and takes steps for its
eradication.
In England,  torture was  once  regarded  as  a  normal
practice  to   ger  information	 regarding  the	 crime,	 the
accomplices and the case property or to extract confessions,
but with  the development  of common  law and  more  radical
ideas imbibing	human  though  and  approach,  such  inhuman
practices were	initially discouraged  and eventually almost
done  away   with  ,  certain  aberrations  here  and  there
notwithstanding. The  police powers of arrest, detention and
interrogation in England were examined in depth by Sir Cyril
Philips Committee- 'Report of a Royal Commission on Criminal
Procedure' (command - Paper 8092 of 1981). The report of the
Royal Commission  is, instructive. In regard to the power of
arrest, the  Report recommended	 that the  power  to  arrest
without a  warrant must	 be related  to and  limited by	 the
object to  be served  by the  arrest, namely, to prevent the
suspect	 from	destroying  evidence   or  interfering	with
witnesses or  warning accomplices  who	have  not  yet	been
arrested or  where there  is a	good reason  to suspect	 the
repetition of the offence and not to every case irrespective
of the object sought to be achieved.
The Royal	Commission suggested certain restrictions on
the  power   of	 arrest	 on  the  basis	 of  the  `necessity
principle'. The Royal commission said :
".... We  recommend that  detention
     upon arrest  for a	 offence  should
     continue only on one or more of the
     following criteria :
(a)  the  person`s`s  unwillingness
     to identify himself so that summons
     may be served upon him;
(b)  the  need   to   prevent   the
     continuation or  repetition of that
     offence;
(c)  the  need   to   protect   the
     arrested person`s	himself or other
     persons or property;
(d)  the need to secure or preserve
     evidence of  or  relating	to  that
     offence or	 to obtain such evidence
     from  the	suspect	 by  questioning
     him; and
(e)  the likelihood of the person`s
     failing  to   appear  at  court  to
     answer anycharge made against him."
The Royal Commission also suggested
     :
"To  help	to  reduce  the	 use  of
     arrest we	would also  propose  the
     introduction here	of a scheme that
     is	 used	in  Ontario  enabling  a
     police officer  to	 issue	what  is
     called an	appearance notice.  That
     procedure can  be	used  to  obtain
     attendance at  the police	 station
     without   resorting    to	  arrest
     provided a	 power to arrest exists,
     for example to be finger printed or
     to participate in an identification
     parade. It	 could also  be extended
     to attendance  for interview  at  a
     time convenient both to the suspect
     and   to	 the   police	 officer
     investigating the case...."
The power	of arrest,  interrogation and  detention has
now  been  streamlined	in  England  on	 the  basis  of	 the
suggestions made by the Royal Commission and incorporated in
police and  Criminal Evidence Act, 1984 and the incidence of
custodial violence  has been minimised there to a very great
extent.
Fundamental rights occupy a place of pride in the India
Constitution.
Article	21
provides  "no  person  shall  be
deprived of his life or personal liberty expect according to
procedure established  by law". Personal liberty, thus, is a
sacred and  cherished  right  under  the  Constitution.	 The
expression "life  of personal  liberty"	 has  been  held  to
include the  right to  live with  human dignity	 and thus it
would also include within itself a guarantee against torture
and assault  by the  State or  its functionaries.
Article 22
guarantees  protection	 against  arrest  and  detention  in
certain cases  and declares  that no  person who is arrested
shall be  detained in  custody without being informed of the
grounds of such arrest and the shall not be denied the right
to consult and defend himself by a legal practitioner of his
choice. Clause	(2) of
Article 22
directs that  the person
arrested and  detained in  custody shall  be produced before
the nearest  Magistrate within	a period of 24 hours of such
arrest, excluding  the time  necessary for  the journey from
the place  of arrest to the court of the Magistrate.
Article
20(3)
of the Constitution lays down that a person accused of
an offence  shall not  be compelled  to be a witness against
himself. These	are some  of  the  constitutional  safeguard
provided to  a person  with a  view to	protect his personal
liberty against	 and unjustified  assault by  the State,  In
tune with  the constitutional  guarantee a  number statutory
provisions also	 seek to  project personal  liberty, dignity
and basic  human rights	 of  the  citizens.  Chapter  V.  of
Criminal Procedure  Code
, 1973	deals  with  the  powers  of
arrest of  a person  and the safeguard which are required to
be followed  by the  police to	protect the  interest of the
arrested person.  Section 41, Cr. P.C. confers powers on any
police officer	to arrest  a person  under the circumstances
specified therein  without any	order or a warrant of arrest
from a Magistrate. Section 46 provides the method and manner
of arrest.  Under this	Section no  formality  is  necessary
while arresting	 a person.  Under Section  49, the police is
not permitted  to use  more restraint  than is	necessary to
permitted to use more restraint than is necessary to prevent
the escape  of the  person. Section  50 enjoins every police
officer arresting  any person without warrant to communicate
to him	the full  particulars of the offence for which he is
arrested and the grounds for such arrest. The police officer
is further enjoined to inform the person arrested that he is
entitled to  be released  on bail  and he  may	arrange	 for
sureties in  the event	of his	arrest	for  a	non-bailable
offence. Section 56 contains a mandatory provision requiring
the police  officer making  an	arrest	without	 warrant  to
produce the  arrested person  before  a	 Magistrate  without
unnecessary delay  and	Section	 57  echoes  Clause  (2)  of
Article 22
of the Constituion of India. There are some other
provisions also	 like Section 53, 54 and 167 which are aimed
at affording  procedural safeguards  to a person arrested by
the police. Whenever a person dies in custody of the police,
Section 176 requires the Magistrate to hold and enquiry into
the cause of death.
However, inspite  of the  constitutional and  statutory
provisions aimed  at safeguarding  the personal	 liberty and
life of	 a citizen,  growing incidence of torture and deaths
in police  custody has	been a disturbing factor. Experience
shows that  worst violations  of  human	 rights	 take  place
during the  course of  investigation, when the police with a
view to secure evidence or confession often resorts to third
degree methods	including torture  and adopts  techniques of
screening arrest  by either  not   recording the  arrest  or
describing the	deprivation of liberty merely as a prolonged
interrogation. A  reading of  the morning  newspapers almost
everyday carrying  reports of dehumanising torture, assault,
rape and  death in  custody of	police or other governmental
agencies is  indeed depressing.	 The increasing incidence of
torture and  death in  custody	has  assumed  such  alarming
proportions that  it is	 affecting the	creditibility of the
Rule of	 Law and  the  administration  of  criminal  justice
system. The community rightly feels perturbed. Society's cry
for justice becomes louder.
The Third	Report of  the National Police Commission in
India expressed its deep concern with custodial demoralising
effect with custodial torture was creating on the society as
a whole.  It made some very useful suggestions. It suggested
:
".......An	  arrest    during   the
     investigation of  a cognizable case
     may be  considered justified in one
     or	  other	   of	the    following
     circumstances :-
(1)  The  case   involves	a  grave
     offence   like   murder,	dacoity,
     robbery,  rape   etc.,  and  it  is
     necessary to arrest the accused and
     bring his movements under restraint
     to	 infuse	  confidence  among  the
     terror stricken victims.
(ii)  The	 accused  is  likely  to
     abscond and  evade the processes of
     law.
(iii)     The accused  is given  to
     violent behaviour	and is likely to
     commit further  offences unless his
     movements	 are	brought	   under
     restraint.
(iv) The  accused	 is  a	habitual
     offender and unless kept in custody
     he	 is  likely  to	 commit	 similar
     offences	again.	 It   would   be
     desirable	 to    insist	 through
     departmental  instructions	 that  a
     police  officer  making  an  arrest
     should  also  record  in  the  case
     diary the	reasons for  making  the
     arrest,  thereby	clarifying   his
     conformity	  to	the    specified
     guidelines......"
The recommendations  of the  Police Commission  (supra)
reflect the  constitutional concomitants  of the fundamental
right	to    personal	 liberty    and	   freedom.    These
recommendations, however,  have not  acquired any  statutory
status so far.
This Court	 in
Joginder  Kumar Vs. State
[1994 (4) SCC,
260] (to  which one  of us,  namely, Anand,  J. was a party)
considered the	dynamics of misuse of police power of arrest
and opined :
"No arrest	 can be	 made because it
     is lawful for the police officer to
     do so.  The existence  of the power
     of	 arrest	  is  one   thing.   The
     justification for	the exercise  of
     it is  quite  another...No.  arrest
     should be made without a reasonable
     satisfaction  reached   after  some
     investigation about the genuineness
     and bonafides  of a complaint and a
     reasonable belief	both as	 to  the
     person's complicity  and even so as
     to	 the   need  to	 effect	 arrest.
Denying person  his  liberty  is  a
     serious matter."
Joginder Kumar
's  case (supra)  involved  arrest  of  a
practising lawyer  who had  bee called to the police station
in connection  with a  case under  inquiry on 7.1.94. On not
receiving any  satisfactory account  of his whereabouts, the
family member of the detained lawyer preferred a petition in
the nature of habeas corpus before this Court on 11.1.94 and
in compliance  with the	 notice, the  lawyer was produced on
14.1.94 before this court the police version was that during
7.1.94 and  14.1.94 the	 lawyer was  not in detention at all
but was	 only assisting the police to detect some cases. The
detenue asserted  otherwise. This  Court was  not  satisfied
with the  police version.  It was  noticed that though as on
that day  the relief  in habeas corpus petition could not be
granted but the questions whether there had been any need to
detain the  lawyer for	5 days	and if	at all he was not in
detention  then	 why  was  this	 Court	not  inform