CASE: Darshan Singh v State of Punjab (2010)
SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1748156/

[Cites
24
, Cited by
228
]
Supreme Court of India
Darshan Singh vs State Of Punjab & Anr on 15 January, 2010
Equivalent citations: AIR 2010 SUPREME COURT 1212, 2010 (2) SCC 333, 2010 AIR SCW 832, (2010) 2 MAD LJ(CRI) 587, (2010) 1 RECCRIR 751, (2010) 1 CRILR(RAJ) 189, 2010 CALCRILR 1 628, (2010) 68 ALLCRIC 709, (2010) 1 MADLW(CRI) 308, (2010) 1 DLT(CRL) 410, (2010) 1 CURCRIR 262, (2010) 1 ORISSA LR 258, (2010) 45 OCR 582, (2010) 1 CRIMES 78, (2010) 3 MH LJ (CRI) 166, (2010) 1 ALLCRILR 537, (2010) 1 ALLCRIR 644.2, (2010) 1 CHANDCRIC 305, (2010) 1 RAJ LW 935, 2010 ALLMR(CRI) 622, 2010 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 189, 2010 (2) SCC(CRI) 1037, 2010 (1) SCALE 467, (2010) 1 SCALE 467, 2010 CRILR(SC&MP) 189
Author:
Dalveer Bhandari
Bench:
Asok Kumar Ganguly
,
Dalveer Bhandari
REPORTABLE




               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1057 of 2002

Darshan Singh                                 .. Appellants

            Versus

State of Punjab & Another                     .. Respondent




                       JUDGMENT
Dalveer Bhandari, J.
1.   This appeal is directed against the judgment and order of

the Punjab & Haryana High Court in Criminal Appeal No.446-

(Division Bench) of 1994 dated 6.8.2002.
2.   Both    Darshan   Singh   and   Bakhtawar   Singh   were

acquitted by the Sessions Court, Ludhiana. The said judgment

of acquittal was set aside by the High Court of Punjab &

Haryana at Chandigarh.
2
3.   Darshan Singh and Bakhtawar Singh filed appeal against

the said judgment before this court. During the pendency of

this appeal, Bakhtawar Singh died and consequently the

appeal filed by him abated.
4.   Brief facts which are necessary to dispose of this appeal

are recapitulated as under:-
The dispute is between very close and intimate family

members.    Deceased Gurcharan Singh was the brother of

Bakhtawar Singh and uncle of Darshan Singh.       He was the

father of Gurdish Singh, PW7, the informant. The agriculture

fields of both brothers, Gurcharan Singh and Bakhtawar

Singh were situated adjoining to each other. According to the

prosecution, on 15.7.1991 at about 8 a.m. Gurdish Singh,

PW7 and his father, Gurcharan Singh were irrigating their

aforesaid fields and were also mending its ridges and at that

time Gurdev Singh, PW8 and Ajit Singh were also present

there. In the meantime, Darshan Singh and Bakhtawar Singh

came there from the side of their fields raising lalkaras and

abused the complainant party. Darshan Singh, accused was

armed with D.B.B.L. gun and his father Bakhtawar Singh was
3
carrying a Gandasa and they were saying that they would

teach a lesson to the complainant party for cutting the ridges.
5.   According to the further story of the prosecution,

Bakhtawar Singh gave a Gandasa blow causing injuries on the

chest of Gurcharan Singh. Gurcharan Singh was also having

a Gandasa with him and in order to save himself he also

caused injury on the head of Bakhtawar Singh.        Thereafter,

Darshan Singh fired two shots from his licensed gun which hit

Gurcharan Singh in the chest and some of the pellets hit

Gurdish Singh PW7 on his left upper arm and Gurdev Singh,

PW8 on his left thigh. Gurcharan Singh fell down and died at

the spot.    Gurdish Singh and others retraced their steps in

order to save themselves. Both the accused in order to save

themselves ran towards their respective houses.        Gurdish

Singh, PW7 left the dead body of Gurcharan Singh and

proceeded to the police station to lodge a report.      Gurdev

Singh PW8 also accompanied him. They met Om Prakash, ASI

at about 9 a.m. at Barnala crossing where Gurdish Singh PW7

gave his statement.    It was then read over and explained to

him who signed the same admitting the contents thereof to be

correct.    Om Prakash, ASI made his endorsement (Ex. N/1)
4
and forwarded the statement to the police station, Rajkot and

on the basis of which the case was registered against both the

accused.
6.   Om Prakash, ASI accompanied Gurdish Singh and

Gurdev Singh to the place of occurrence. He prepared inquest

report in respect of the dead body of Gurcharan Singh and

then sent the dead body for post-mortem examination through

Constable Milkha Singh and Head Constable Pargat Singh.

Om Prakash, ASI lifted blood stained earth from the place

where dead body of Gurcharan Singh was lying and took the

same into possession after preparing the recovery memo. One

gandasa and an empty cartridge of 12 bore were found lying

near the dead body.    The gandasa and the empty cartridge

were also taken into possession.    The Investigating Officer

prepared visual site plan of the place of occurrence with

marginal notes.   Gurdish Singh and Gurdev Singh's injury

statements were also prepared and sent for medico legal

examination.
7.   Dr.   Mukesh     Gupta   PW4   conducted    post-mortem

examination on the dead body of Gurcharan Singh on
5
15.7.1991 at 4.30 p.m.     On the same day at 5.50 p.m. Dr.

Gupta also conducted medico legal examination of Gurdev

Singh and found one abrasion on his left thigh.     Dr. Gupta

found a superficial abrasion on Gurdish Singh on his elbow.

Darshan Singh and Bakhtawar Singh were arrested on

28.7.1991. The factum of the incident has not been denied by

the accused and they claimed right of private defence.
8.   According to the prosecution, the motive of the crime was

dispute regarding partition of land between both brothers

Bakhtawar Singh and Gurcharan Singh. One year prior to the

present incident, the village Panchayat had got the dispute

compromised by a written agreement. There was a common

well situated in the adjoining land. As a result of the

compromise, the well along with a small piece of land attached

to it was given to Gurcharan Singh and the land of common

pathway leading to the well was given to the accused party.

The compromise was not accepted by the accused party and

they wanted repartition of the land attached to the well. This

grievance led to this unfortunate incident.
6
9.   The prosecution examined 11 witnesses.           Dr. Mukesh

Gupta, PW4 who conducted the post-mortem examination

found the following injuries on the dead body of Gurcharan

Singh:-
"1.   There were 14 wounds in an area of 20 cm x
           18 cm on left side of the chest above the
           nipple. One of the wounds which was above
           the nipple was having inverted margins. A
           wad was recovered from this wound. This
           wound was 1 cm x 1 cm. The 9 wounds which
           measured 0.75 cm x 0.75 cm which were on
           the chest and shoulder also had inverted
           margins. Out of these wounds 6 were found to
           entering chest cavity and 6 pellets were
           recovered from the chest cavity. The remaining
           3 wounds were having everted margins. These
           were near the axilla and each wound
           measured 1 cm x 1 cm. One of the 14 wounds
           which measured 0.75 cm x 1.5 cm was having
           inverted margins. It was skin deep and was on
           the shoulder, upper part of humerous and
           clavicle bones were found to be fractured. 4th
           and 5th rib of the left side of the chest were also
           found to be fractured.
2. There were 7 wounds in an area of 20 cm x 8 cm
        on the upper part of the chest on its right side
        above the nipple. Out of these wounds 3 wounds
        measuring 0.75 cm x 1 cm each was having
        inverted margins, these were skin deep.        2
        wounds were having everted margins having a
        dimension of 1 x 1 cm each near the axilla. A
        pellet was recovered from near the axilla. The
        remaining 2 wounds were near the top of right
        shoulder measuring 0.75 x 1.5 cm each with
        inverted margins. These were skin deep.
7
3. An incised wound 8 cm x 0.5 cm skin deep on the
         left side of chest 3 cm above the nipple. It was
         horizontally placed."
10.   Dr. Mukesh Gupta found following injury on the person

of Gurdev Singh:-
"An abrasion measuring 1 cm x 0.5 cm on the front
      and inner side of left thigh. It was a superficial
      abrasion reddish in colour, over the junction of
      upper 1/3rd and lower 2/3rd of the thigh. There was
      damage to the pajama corresponding to the injury."
11.   According to the doctor, the injury was simple in nature

and was caused within 24 hours. Doctor also found injury on

Gurdish Singh to be superficial. The same reads as under:-
"A very superficial abrasion 1 cm x 0.5 cm on the
      upper side of left upper arm 12 cm above the elbow.
      It was reddish in colour."
12.   It may be relevant to mention that Dr. M.S. Gill, PW5,

who conducted the medical examination of Bakhtawar Singh

found the following injuries on his person:-
"1. An incised wound 7 cm x 0.5 cm on the parietal
      region of the right side of head. It was placed
      anterior posteriorly. The wound was bone deep and
      4 cm above the right pinna. Clotted blood was
      present."
13.   According to doctor, this injury was caused by sharp-

edged weapons.
8
14.   Both Gurdish Singh, PW7 and Gurdev Singh, PW8 are

the eye-witnesses who gave detailed description of the

occurrence. After examining the prosecution evidence, the

following statements of Darshan Singh and Bakhtawar Singh

were recorded under section 313 Cr. P.C.. The relevant portion

of the statement of Darshan Singh reads as under:-
"I am innocent. In fact the complainant party had
      gone back from the agreement got effected by the
      Panchayat one year prior to the occurrence. In
      accordance with the said compromise we had
      ploughed the land which was earlier under common
      pathway. One day prior to the occurrence we had
      irrigated that portion of the land. On the day of
      occurrence when we went to the fields, Gurcharan
      Singh (deceased) along with 3-4 outsiders came to
      our field and remarked that we would be taught a
      lesson for irrigating the land.         Immediately
      thereafter Gurcharan Singh gave a gandasa blow
      hitting my father Bakhtawar Singh on the head as a
      result of which he fell down. I felt that my father
      had been killed. Gurcharan Singh then advanced
      towards me holding the gandasa. I apprehended
      that I too would be killed and I then pulled the
      trigger of my gun. Gurcharan Singh fell to the
      ground and his companions took to their heels. I
      then took Bakhtawar Singh in injured condition to
      Govt. hospital, Sudhar. Police came to the hospital
      at about 5 p.m. We were kept under guard and
      brought to the police station on the next day after
      getting my father discharged. We have been falsely
      implicated in this case.
Bakhtawar Singh (accused) pleaded as under:-
9
"I am innocent. It was the complainant party who
      had resiled from the compromise got effected by
      Panchayat about a year before the occurrence. We
      had ploughed the land which had fallen to our
      share and one day prior to the occurrence we had
      irrigated the same. On the day of occurrence when
      we went to the fields Gurcharan Singh (deceased)
      along with 3-4 outsiders came to our field and
      remarked that we would be taught a lesson for
      irrigating   the    land.    Immediately thereafter
      Gurcharan Singh gave a gandasa blow on my head
      as a result of which I fell down. Gurcharan Singh
      then advanced towards Darshan Singh holding his
      gandasa whereupon Darshan Singh fired a shot
      from his gun. I was taken to Government hospital,
      Sudhar by Darshan Singh. Police came there on
      the same day at about 5 p.m. and took us to the
      police station after getting me discharged. I have
      been falsely involved in this case."
15.   According to the versions of the accused Darshan Singh

and Bakhtawar Singh, Gurcharan first gave Gandasa blow

hitting Bakhtawar Singh on the head and the injury caused on

Bakhtawar Singh was an incised wound of 7 cm x 0.5 cm. on

the parietal region of the right side of head. The wound was

bone deep and 4 cm above the right pinna and clotted blood

was present and after receiving these injuries in order to save

himself, Darshan Singh fired at Gurcharan Singh and as a

result of which he died.   According to the accused, the entire

act is covered by the right of private defence. According to the

prosecution, Bakhtawar Singh gave first injury on the chest of
10
Gurcharan Singh whereas according to the defence the first

injury was given by Gurcharan Singh to Bakhtawar Singh.

The appellant Darshan Singh fired only after the serious

incised wound by a Gandasa was inflicted on his father

Bakhtawar Singh and at that time in order to save his life he

fired 2 shots which hit the deceased Gurcharan Singh leading

to his death.
16.   The point for determination is the place where the

unfortunate incident had taken place. According to Bhupinder

Singh Patwari, PW3, point `A' in site plan Ex.PC denotes the

place where the dead body of Gurcharan Singh was said to be

lying and this point is in Khasra No.10. He further testified

that accused Bakhtawar Singh was recorded in cultivating

possession of Khasra No.10. According to the finding of the

trial court, it clearly shows that Bakhtawar Singh was in

possession of Khasra No.10.     According to Bhupinder Singh

Patwari, Point `E' is in Khasra No.10 from where Darshan

Singh had allegedly fired at Gurcharan Singh.      According to

the site plan prepared by Bhupinder Singh Patwari, Point `F' is

the place where the dispute took place with Bakhtawar Singh.

According to the Patwari, this point `F' is in Khasra No.10 at a
11
distance of 5 karms which is equivalent to 27.5 feet from the

aforesaid pathway and point `A' is at a distance of 7 karms

from point `F'. Thus, from this evidence it is evident that the

occurrence took place inside Khasra No.10 which was in

possession of Bakhtawar Singh accused.         Gurcharan Singh

covered a distance of about 7 karms which is equivalent to

37.5 feet.
17.   The trial court came to the conclusion that the presence

of Gurdev Singh and Gurdish Singh at the time of alleged

occurrence is highly doubtful. Dr. Mukesh Gupta also stated

that injuries on the person of Gurdev Singh and Gurdish

Singh could be caused by friendly hands and can be self

suffered.    He further stated in the cross examination that

duration of the injuries was less than 6 hours.       As per the

prosecution case, the injuries were allegedly received by them

at about 8 a.m.    No pellet was recovered from the injuries of

these witnesses namely, Gurdev Singh and Gurdish Singh.

According to the trial court, the possibility of these injuries on

their person having been fabricated at a later stage cannot be

ruled out. The trial court also held that there was no mention

of the injuries received by Gurdish Singh and Gurdev Singh in
12
the inquest report whereas this fact finds mention in the first

information report.     According to the prosecution, Gurdish

Singh suffered pellet injury on the left upper arm whereas,

Gurdev Singh was hit on his left thigh.        If it was so, there

would have been mention of this fact in the inquest report or

the investigating officer must have prepared their injury

statement, but neither any such injury statement was

prepared at the spot nor their medical-examination was

carried out. Om Prakash, ASI, in his cross-examination has

admitted that he came to know about the injuries of Gurdish

Singh    and   Gurdev    Singh   only   when    they   gave   their

supplementary statements at the bus stand. According to the

findings of the trial court, their injury statement was prepared

at the spot and they were medically examined by Dr. Mukesh

Gupta.   Thus, according to the trial court the injuries were

fabricated with connivance with the investigating officer just in

order to make Gurdish Singh and Gurdev Singh stamp

witnesses.
18. The trial court after discussing the entire evidence came

to the conclusion that two counter versions of the case have

been presented and, in the view of the trial court, the defence
13
version is more probable and nearer to the truth for the

following reasons:
(i)     The delay in lodging the FIR impells the court
             to   scrutinize     the    evidence        of    witnesses
             regarding the actual occurrence with greater
             care and caution.
(ii)    The crucial point to be decided in this case
             was that who was the aggressor or which of
             the parties can have the motive to open the
             attack?
The trial court held that "if the accused were
             already    cultivating          the      land     as     per
             compromise, then it does not appeal to reason
             as to why they would feel aggrieved. On the
             other    hand     there    was        strong    motive   for
             Gurcharan Singh to assault the                     accused
             person    as      he      has     resiled       from     the
             compromise."
(iii)   The next crucial point according to the trial
             court was as to where the incident took place?
             According to the trial court the incident had
             taken place in the field of the accused.
(iv)    According to the trial court, the presence of the
             prosecution     witnesses        Gurdev         Singh    and
14
Gurdish    Singh   at   the   time   of    alleged
      occurrence is highly doubtful.       Dr. Mukesh
      Gupta stated that the injuries on Gurdev
Singh and Gurdish Singh could be caused by
      friendly hands and can be self suffered.
(v)   No pellet was recovered from the injuries of the
      prosecution witnesses namely, Gurdev Singh
      and Gurdish Singh. The possibility of the
      injuries   on   their   persons   having     been
      fabricated at a later stage cannot be ruled out.

      The trial court found that, in the instant case,
      it appeared that the inquest report was
      prepared first and the FIR was prepared at
      some later stage because there was no mention
      about the injuries of Gurdev Singh and
      Gurdish Singh in the inquest report, whereas
      this fact is mentioned in the FIR. According to
      the prosecution case, Gurdish Singh suffered a
      pellet injury on his left upper arm whereas,
      Gurdev Singh was hit on his left thigh. This
      was so mentioned in the FIR. If it was so, this
      fact would have been mentioned in the inquest
      report or the Investigating Officer must have
      prepared their injury statement, but no such
      injury statement was prepared at the spot nor
      their medical examination was got done.
15
In the cross-examination, Om Prakash
       ASI had admitted that he came to know about
       the injuries of Gurdish Singh and Gurdev
       Singh     only    when     they   gave    their
       supplementary statements at the bus stand.
       The finding of the trial court is that the
       injuries were fabricated with the connivance of
       the Investigating Officer just in order to make
       Gurdish   Singh   and Gurdev      Singh stamp
       witnesses.
(vi)   Gurdish Singh P.W.7 had admitted that his
       father Gurcharan Singh was face to face when
       Bakhtawar Singh gave Gandasa blow from
       above to downward vertically on the chest of
       Gurcharan Singh.         However, Dr. Mukesh
       Gupta contradicted him and stated that injury
       no.3 on the person of Gurcharan Singh was
       skin deep and was horizontally placed and was
       possible by a fall on a sharp edged weapon.
From this it can s