CASE: Gudikanti Narasimhulu v Public Prosecutor (1978)
SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/656741/

[Cites
4
, Cited by
3112
]
Supreme Court of India
Gudikanti Narasimhulu And Ors vs Public Prosecutor, High Court Of Andhra ... on 6 December, 1977
Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR 429, 1978 SCR (2) 371, AIR 1978 SUPREME COURT 429, (1978) 1 SCC 240, 1978 SCC(CRI) 115, (1978) 1 SC WR 446, 1978 CRI APP R (SC) 35, 1978 ALLCRIC 80, 1978 SIMLC 220, 1978 SC CRI R 99, (1978) 2 SCR 371
Author:
V.R. Krishnaiyer
Bench:
V.R. Krishnaiyer
PETITIONER:
GUDIKANTI NARASIMHULU AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF ANDHRA PRADESH

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/12/1977

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.

CITATION:
 1978 AIR  429		  1978 SCR  (2) 371
 1978 SCC  (1) 240
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1980 SC1632	 (28,32)
 R	    1984 SC1503	 (9)


ACT:
Bail-Grant  of bail-Practice and Procedure in the matter  of
granting of bail to an accused person pending the hearing of
an  appeal--Guidelines for granting bail-Order XLVII Rule  6
r/w  Order  XXI Rules 6 and 27 of the Supreme  Court  Rules,
1966.



HEADNOTE:
The  petitioners  who were convicted by the  Andhra  Pradesh
High Court for the offences u/ss. 148, 302, 302J 149
I.P.C
.,
in   an	 appeal	 by  the  state	 against  their	  acquittal,
surrendered  themselves to curial custody as required  under
Order XXI of the Supreme Court Rules 1966, before preferring
the   statutory	 appeal	 u/s  2(c)  of	the  Supreme   Court
(Enlargement  of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act 28  of
1970 r/w
S. 379
Crl.  P. C. 1973.  They were on bail at	 the
trial  and  appellate stages and were also on  parole  after
their surrender pursuant to the High Court Judgment.
Allowing their bail petition the Court,
HELD  :	 1. The issue of "Bail or Jail"-at the	pretrial  or
post-conviction	 stage-although largely hinging on  judicial
discretion,  is one of liberty, justice, public	 safety	 and
burden	of the public treasury, all of which insist  that  a
developed  jurisprudence of bail is integral to	 a  socially
sensitized judicial process. [372 G]
2.Personal   liberty   of  an  accused	or   convict   is
fundamental,  suffering	 lawful	 eclipse only  in  terms  of
"procedure  established	 by law".  The last four  words'  of
Art. 21
are the life of that human right. [373 A]
3.The  significance  and  sweep	 of
Art.  21
make   the
deprivation of liberty, ,ephemeral or enduring, a matter  of
grave concern and permissible only when the law	 authorising
it  is	reasonable, even handed and geared to the  goals  of
community  good	 and State necessity spelt out in
Art.	 19.
Reasonableness	postulates intelligent care  and  predicates
that  deprivation of freedom by refusal of bail is  not	 for
punitive purpose but for the bifocal interests of justice to
the individual involved and society affected. [376 D-E]
4.All  deprivation  of	liberty is  validated  by  social
defense	 and  individual correction along an  anti  criminal
direction.   Public justice is central to the whole of	bail
law fleeing justice must be forbidden but punitive harshness
should be minimised.  Restorative devices to redeem the man,
even  through  community service,  meditating  drill,  study
classes or other resources should be innovated, and  playing
foul   with  public  peace  by	tampering   with   evidence,
intimidating  witnesses	 or  committing	 offences  while  on
judicially  sanctioned "free enterprise" should be  provided
against.  No seeker of justice shall play confidence  tricks
on  the court or community.  Conditions may be	hung  around
bail  orders  not to cripple but to protect.   Such  is	 the
holistic jurisdiction and humanistic orientation invoked  by
the  judicial  discretion correlated to the  values  of	 our
constitution.[376 H, 377 A]
5.The  principal rule to guide release on bail should  be
to secure the presenceof  the applicant who seeks  to  be
liberated, to take judgment and serve sentence in the  event
of  the	 court	punishing him with  imprisonment.   In	this
perspective,  relevance	 of considerations is  regulated  by
their  nexus  with the likely absence of the  applicant	 for
fear of a severe sentence. [375 C-D]
6.The  vital  considerations  are  :-(a)  The  nature  of
charge,	 the nature of the evidence and, the  punishment  to
which  the party may be liable, if convicted, or  conviction
is confirmed.  When the crime charged is of the highest
11-1114SCI/77
372
magnitude  and	the punishment of it assigned by law  is  of
extreme	 severity,  the court may reasonably  presume,	some
evidence warranting that no amount of bail would secure	 the
presence of the convict at the stage of judgment, should  he
be  enlarged;  (b)  whether the cause of  justice  would  be
thwarted by him who seeks the benignant jurisdiction of	 the
court to be freed for the time being (c) Antecedents of	 the
man  and socio-geographical circumstances; and	whether	 the
petitoner's record shows him to be a habitual offender;	 (d)
when  a	 person,  charged  with a  grave  offence  has	been
acquitted  at  a  stage,  the  intermediate  acquittal	 has
pertinence to a bail plea when the appeal before this  court
pends.	 The  ground  for  denial  of  provisional  release,
becomes	 weaker	 when a fair finding of innocence  has	been
recorded by one court; (e) Whether the accused's safety	 may
be  more in prison than in the vengeful village where  feuds
have  provoked	the violent offence and (f)  the  period  in
prison already spent and the prospect of delay in the appeal
being  heard and disposed of. [374 G-H. 375 D, E, H, 376  A,
B, C,E, V, 377 B-H]
7.Courts  should soberly size up Police exaggerations  of
prospective  misconduct	 of the accused, if  enlarged,	lest
danger	of  excesses  and injustice creep  subtly  into	 the
discretionary  curial  technique.   Bad	 record	 and  police
prediction of criminal prospects to invalidate the bail plea
are admissible in principle but shall not stampede the court
into a complacement refusal. [377 D-E]
8.To  answer the test of reasonableness, subject  to  the
need  for  securing the presence of the bail  applicant	 the
court  must  also weigh the contrary factors  viz.  (i)	 the
better chances which a man on bail has to prepare or present
his  case  that are remanded in custody, (ii)  promotion  of
public	justice,  (iii) the considerable public	 expense  in
keeping	 in  custody  where no danger  of  disappearance  or
disturbance  can  arise and (iv) the  deplorable  condition,
verging on the inhuman of our sub-jails. [376 E-G]
9.In the instant case, in view of the circumstances  that
(a) the petitioners were free when on bail during the  trial
and free when on parole by the state, (b) they did not abuse
the trust reposed by the court or the State during the	said
periods, (c) they were acquitted by the trial court (d) four
other  fellow  accused were enlarged on bail (e)  they	have
suffered  imprisonment	around a year and (f)  a  reasonable
prediction of the time of the hearing of the appeal may take
the  court  to	a few years ahead, the	court  directed	 the
petitioners to be enlarged on bail on terms. [378 C-H]



JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Criminal Misc.   Petition
No.1443 of 1977.
(APPLICATION FOR BAIL)
P.Ram Reddy and M. S. Rana Rao for the Appellants.
G.   N. Rao for the Respondent.
ORDER
KRISHNA IYER, J. "Bail or jail ?"- at the pre-trial or post-
conviction stage-belongs to the blurred area of the criminal
justice system and largely binges on the hunch of the bench,
otherwise  called judicial discretion.	The Code is  cryptic
on  this  topic and the court prefers to be  tacit,  be	 the
order  custodial  or  not.  And yet, the  issue	 is  one  of
liberty,  justice,  public safety and burden of	 the  public
treasury, all of which insist that a developed jurisprudence
of  bail  is  integral to  a  socially	sensitized  judicial
process.   A  Chamber judge in this summit court I  have  to
deal with this uncanalised case flow, ad hoc response to the
docket	being  the  flockering	candle	light.	 So  it	  is
desirable   that  the  subject	is  disposed  of  on   basic
principle,  not	 improvised brevity  draped  or	 discretion.
Personal  liberty,  deprived when bail is  refused,  is	 too
precious  a  value of our constitutional  system  recognised
under
Art. 21
373
that  the  curial  power  to negate  it	 is  a	great  trust
exercisable,  not  casually  but  judicially,  with   lively
concern	 for the cost to the individual and  the  community.
To glamorize impressionistic orders as discretionary may, on
occasions,  make  a litigative gamble decisive of  a  funda-
mental right.  After all, personal liberty of an accused  or
convict	 is  fundamental, suffering lawful eclipse  only  in
terms  of  'procedure established by law'.   The  last	four
words of
Art. 21
are the life of that human right.
The  doctrine  of Police Power,	 constitutionally  validates
punitive  processes  for the maintenance  of  public  order,
security  of the State, national integrity and the  interest
of  the	 public generally.  Even so, having  regard  to	 the
solemn	issue  involved, deprivation  of  personal  freedom,
ephemeral  or enduring, must be founded on the most  serious
considerations	 relevant  to  the  welfare  objectives	  of
society, specified in the Constitution.
What, then, is 'judicial discretion' in this bail context  ?
In the elegant words of Benjamin Cardozo.
"The judge, even when he is free, is still not
	      wholly  free.   He  is  not  to  innovate	  at
	      pleasure.	  He is not a knight-errant  roaming
	      at will in pursuit of his own ideal of  beauty
	      or of goodness.  He is to draw his inspiration
	      from  consecrated	 principlcs.  He is  not  to
	      yield  to	 spasmodic sentiment, to  vague	 and
	      unregulated benevolence.	He is to exercise  a
	      discretion  informed by tradition,  methodized
	      by   analogy,  disciplined.  by  system,	 and
	      subordinated  to 'the primordial necessity  of
	      order in the social life.	 Wide enough in	 all
	      conscience  is the, field of  discretion	that
	      remains."
The   Nature  of	the  Judicial	Process-Yale
	      University Press, (1921)].
Even so it is useful to notice the tart  terms
	      of Lord Camden that
	      'the  discretion	of  a judge is	the  law  of
	      tyrants	:  it  is  always  unknown,  it	  is
	      different in different men; it is casual,	 and
	      depends upon constitution, temper and passion.
	      In the best, it is oftentimes caprice; in	 the
	      worst, it is every vice, folly and passion  to
	      which  human nature is liable . . ." (I  Bovu.
	      Law Dict., Rawles' III Revision p.  885-quoted
	      in Judicial Discretion-National College of the
	      State Judiciary, Reno, Nevada p. 14).
Some jurists have regarded the term 'judicial discretion' as
a misnomer.  Nevertheless, the vestingn of discretion is the
unspoken  but  inescapable, silent command of  our  judicial
system, and those who exercise it will remember that
	      "discretion,  when  applied  to  a  court	  of
	      justice, means sound discretion guided by law.
	      It must be governed by rule, not by humour; it
	      must not be arbitrary, vague and fanciful, but
	      legal and regular."
(Attributed to Lord Mansfield, Tingley v.	   Bolby,
	      14 N.W. 145)
374
"An  appeal  to  a judge's  discretion  is  an
	      appeal   to  his	judicial  conscience.	 The
	      discretion   must	  be   exercised,   not	  in
	      opposition   to,	but  in	  accordance   with,
	      established principles of law."
[Judical Discretion, (ibid) p. 33]
Having	grasped the core concept of judicial discretion	 and
the  constitutional  perspective  in which  the	 court	must
operate public policy by a restraint on liberty, we have  to
proceed	 to see what are the relevant criteria for grant  or
refusal of bail in the case of a person who has either	been
convicted and has appealed or one whose conviction has	been
set aside but leave has been granted by this Court to appeal
against	 the  acquittal.   What	 is  often  forgotten,	 and
therefore warrants reminder, is the object to keep a  person
in judicial custody pending trial or disposal of an  appeal.
Lord Russel, C.J., said :
"I observe that in this case bail was  refused
	      for  the prisoner.  It cannot be too  strongly
	      impressed	 on the, magistracy of	the  country
	      that   bail  is  not  to	be  withheld  as   a
	      punishment,  but that the requirements  as  to
	      bail  are merely to secure the  attendance  of
	      the prisoner at trial."
(R.v  Rose-1898  18 Cox CC. 717; 67  LJQD	 289
	      quoted  in  The Granting of Bail',  Mod.	 Law
	      Rev.  Vol. 81, Jan. 1968 p. 40, 48).
This  theme was developed by Lord Russel of  Killowen  C.J.,
when he charged the grand jury at Salisbury Assizes, 1899 :
it  was  the  duty  of  magistrates  to  admit
	      accused persons to bail, wherever practicable,
	      unless there were strong grounds for supposing
	      that  such  persons would not appear  to	take
	      their  trial.  It was not the  poorer  classes
	      who  did not appear, for	their  circumstances
	      were  such as to tie them to the	place  where
	      they carried on their work.  They had not	 the
	      golden wings with which to fly from justice."
	      [(1899)  63  J.P. 193, Mod.  Law, Rev.  p.  49
	      ibid].
In Archbold it is stated that
	      "The  proper  test of whether bail  should  be
	      granted  or refused is whether it is  probable
	      that  the	 defendant will appear to  take	 his
	      trial....
The test should be applied by reference to the
	      following considerations :
(1)   The nature of the accusation.
	      (2)   The nature of the evidence in support of
	      the accusation.
(3)   The	 severity  of the  punishment  which
	      conviction will entail...
375
(4)   Whether the sureties are independent, or
	      indemnified by the accused person. . . . . "
(Mod.  Law Rev. ibid. p. 53-Archbold, Pleading
	      Evidence and Practice in Criminal Cases,	36th
	      edn., London, 1966 para 203)
Perhaps, this is an overly simplistic statement and we	must
remember  the constitutional focus in
Art. 21
and
19
before
following diffuse observations and practices in the  English
system.	  Even in England there is a growing awareness	that
the  working of the bail system requires a second look	from
the  point  of	view of correct	 legal	criteria  and  sound
principles,  as has been pointed out by Dr. Bottomley.	(The
Granting  of  Bails : Principles and Practices :  Mod.	 Law
Rev. ibid, p. 40 to 54).
Let  us	 have  a glance at the pros and cons  and  the	true
principle around which other relevant factors must  revolve.
When  the  case	 is  finally disposed of  and  a  person  is
sentenced  to  incarceration, things stand  on	a  different
footing.   We are concerned with the penultimate  stage	 and
the  principal	rule to guide release on bail should  be  to
secure	the  presence  of  the applicant  who  seeks  to  be
liberated, to take judgment and serve sentence in the  event
of  the	 court	punishing him with  imprisonment.   In	this
perspective,  relevance	 of considerations is  regulated  by
their  nexus  with the likely absence of the  applicant	 for
fear of a severe sentence, if such be plausible in the case.
As  Erle  J. indicated, when the crime charged (of  which  a
conviction  has been sustained) is of the highest  magnitude
and  the  punishment  of it assigned by law  is	 of  extreme
severity,  the court may reasonably presume,  some  evidence
warranting, that no amount of bail would secure the presence
of  the	 convict  at the stage of  judgment,  should  he  be
enlarged.  (Mod.  Law Rev. p. 50 ibid, 1852 I. E. &  B.	 1).
Lord Campbell CJ concurred in this approach in that case and
Coleridge J. set down the order of priorities, as follows :
"I  do  not  think that an  accused  party  is
	      detained in custody because of his guilt,	 but
	      because there are sufficient probable  grounds
	      for  the	charge	against him as	to  make  it
	      proper  that he should be tried,	and  because
	      the  detention  is  necessary  to	 ensure	 his
	      appearance  at trial. It is a  very  important
	      element in considering whether the' party,  if
	      admitted	to  bail, would appear to  take	 his
	      trial;  and  I  think  that  in  coming  to  a
	      determination  on	 that point  three  elements
	      will  generally be found the most important  :
the  charge,  the nature of  the	evidence  by
	      which  it is supported, and the punishment  to
	      which the party would be liable if  convicted.
	      In  the  present case, the charge is  that  of
	      wilful   murder;	the  evidence  contains	  an
	      admission by the prisoners of the truth of the
	      charge, and the punishment of the offence	 is,
	      by law, death."
(Mod.  Law Rev. ibid, p. 50-51)
It  is	thus obvious that the nature of the  charge  is	 the
vital  factor  and  the	 nature	 of  the  evidence  also  is
pertinent.  The punishment to
376
which the party may be liable, if convicted or conviction is
confirmed, also bears upon the issue.
Another	 relevant  factor is as to whether  the,  course  of
justice	 would	be thwarted by him who seeks  the  benignant
jurisdiction  of the Court to be freed for the	time  being.
[Patrick Devlin, The Criminal Prosecution in England  London
1960 p. 75-Mod.	 Law Rev. ibid p. 50.]
Thus  the  legal principle and practice validate  the  court
considering the likelihood of the applicant interfering with
witnesses  for	the prosecution or otherwise  polluting	 the
process	 of  justice.	It  is	not  only  traditional	 but
rational,  in this context, to enquire into the	 antecedents
of  a man who is applying for bail to find whether he has  a
bad  recordparticularly a record which suggests that  he  is
likely to commit serious offences while on bail.  In  regard
to  habituals, it is part of criminological history  that  a
thoughtless  bail order has enabled the, bailee	 to  exploit
the opportunity to inflict further crimes on the members  of
society.   Bail discretion, on the basis of evidence.  about
the  criminal  record of a defendant, is  therefore  not  an
exercise in irrelevance.
The  significance and sweep of
Art. 21
make the	 deprivation
of  liberty 'a matter of grave concern and permissible	only
when  the law authorising it is reasonable, even-handed	 and
geared	to the goals of community good and  State  necessity
spelt out in
Art. 19.
Indeed, the considerations I have set
out   as   criteria  are  germane  to	the   constitutional
proposition  I	have  deduced.	 Reasonableness	  postulates
intelligent care and predicates that deprivation of freedom-
by  refusal of bail is not for punitive purpose but for	 the
bi-focal interests of justice-to the individual involved and
society affected.
We  must  weigh the contrary factors to answer the  test  of
reasonableness,	 subject  to  the  need	 for  securing	 the
presence,  of the bail applicant.  It makes sense to  assume
that a man on bail has a better chance to prepare or present
his  case  than	 one remanded in  custody.   And  if  public
justice	 is to be promoted, mechanical detention  should  be
close to ours,the  function of bail is limited,	 'community
roots' of the, applicant arestressed  and, after the  Vera
Foundation's Manhattan Bail Project, monetary suretyship  is
losing	ground.	 The considerable public expense in  keeping
in  custody where no danger of disappearance or	 disturbance
can  arise,  is	 not a	negligible  consideration.   Equally
important  is  the  deplorable condition,  verging  on.	 the
inhuman,  of our subjails, that the unrewarding cruelty	 and
expensive  custody of avoidable incarceration makes  refusal
of  bail unreasonable and a Policy favouring release  justly
sensible.
A   few	 other	weighty	 factors  deserve  reference.	 All
deprivation  of liberty is validated by social	defence	 and
individual  cor