CASE: State of Punjab v Gurmit Singh (1996)
SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1046545/

[Cites
13
, Cited by
1219
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Punjab vs Gurmit Singh & Ors on 16 January, 1996
Equivalent citations: 1996 AIR 1393, 1996 SCC (2) 384, (1996) 1 SCJ 566, AIR 1996 SUPREME COURT 1393, 1996 (2) SCC 384, 1996 AIR SCW 998, 1996 (1) JT 298, 1996 CRIAPPR(SC) 88, 1996 SCC(CRI) 316, 1996 UP CRIR 161, 1996 (1) SCR 532, (1996) 2 APLJ 21, 1996 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 652, (1996) 1 CRIMES 37, (1996) 1 MAHLR 808, (1996) 1 ALLCRILR 601, (1996) 1 CRICJ 231, (1996) 20 ALLCRIR 220, (1996) 10 OCR 293, (1996) 2 RAJ LW 97, (1996) 1 RECCRIR 533, (1996) 4 CURCRIR 134, (1996) 2 BLJ 226
PETITIONER:
THE STATE OF PUNJAB

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
GURMIT SINGH & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	16/01/1996

BENCH:
ANAND, A.S. (J)
BENCH:
ANAND, A.S. (J)
AHMAD SAGHIR S. (J)

CITATION:
 1996 AIR 1393		  1996 SCC  (2) 384
 JT 1996 (1)   298	  1996 SCALE  (1)309


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
DR. ANAND, J.
This appeal  under
Section 14
of the Terrorist Affected
Areas (Special	Courts) Act,  1984 is  directed against	 the
judgment and  order  of	 Additional  Judge,  Special  Court,
Ludhiana  Dated	 1.6.1985  by  which  the  respondents	were
acquitted of  the charge  of abduction	and rape.  For	what
follows, the  judgment impugned	 in this  appeal, presents a
rather	disquietening	and   a	  disturbing   feature.	  It
demonstrates lack of sensitivity on the part of the court by
casting unjustified  stigmas on	 a prosecutrix aged below 16
years in  a rape  case, by  overlooking human psychology and
behavioral probabilities.  An intrinsically  wrong  approach
while appreciating  the testimonial  potency of the evidence
of the	prosecutrix has	 resulted in miscarriage of justice.
First a brief reference to the prosecution case:
The prosecutrix  (name withheld  by  us),a	 young	girl
below 16 years of age, was studying in the 10th class at the
relevant time  in  Government  High  School,  Pakhowal.	 The
matriculation examinations  were going	on at  the  material
time. The  examination centre of the prosecutrix was located
in the	Boys High  School, Pakhowal.  On 30th March, 1984 at
about 12.30  p.m. after	 taking her  test in  Geography, the
prosecutrix was	 going to  the house  of her maternal uncle,
Darshan Singh,	and when she had covered a distance of about
100 karmas  from the  school, a	 blue ambassador  car  being
driven by a sikh youth aged 20/25 years came from behind. In
that car  Gurmit Singh, Jagjit Singh @ Bawa and Ranjit Singh
accused were sitting. The car stopped near her. Ranjit Singh
accused	 came  out  of	the  car  and  caught  hold  of	 the
prosecutrix from  her arm  and pushed  her inside  the	car.
Accused Jagjit Singh @ Bawa put his hand on the mouth of the
prosecutrix,  while  Gurmit  Singh  accused  threatened	 the
prosecutrix, that  in case  she raised an alarm she would be
done to	 death. All  the three	accused (respondents herein)
drove her  to the  tubewell of Ranjit Singh accused. She was
taken to  the `kotha' of the Tubewell. The driver of the car
after leaving  the prosecutrix and the three accused persons
there went away with the car. In the said kotha Gurmit Singh
compelled the prosecutrix to take liquor, misrepresenting to
her that  it was  juice. Her refusal did not have any effect
and she	 reluctantly consumed  liquor. Gurmit Singh then got
removed her  salwar and	 also opened her shirt. She was made
to lie	on a  cot in  the kotha while his companions guarded
the kotha  from outside.  Gurmit Singh	committed rape	upon
her. She  raised rule  as she  was suffering pain but Gurmit
Singh threatened  to kill  her if  she persisted  in raising
alarm. Due  to that  threat, she  kept quiet.  After  Gurmit
Singh had  committed rape  upon her,  the other two accused,
who were  earlier guarding  the kotha  from outside, came in
one by	one, and committed rape upon her. Jagjit Singh alias
bawa committed rape on her after Gurmit Singh and thereafter
Ranjit Singh  committed rape on her. Each one of the accused
committed sexual  intercourse with  the prosecutrix forcibly
and against  her will.	They all  subjected  her  to  sexual
intercourse once  again during	the night  against her will.
Next morning at about 6.00 a.m., the same car arrived at the
tubewell kotha	of Ranjit  Singh and  the three accused made
her to	sit in	that car  and left  her near  the Boys	High
School, Pakhowal  near about  the place	 from where  she had
been abducted.	The prosecutrix	 had to take her examination
in the	subject of  Hygiene on	that date. She, after taking
her examination	 in Hygeine,  reached  her  village  Nangal-
Kalan, at  about noon  time and narrated the entire story to
her mother,  Smt. Gurdev  Kaur, PW7. Her father Trilok Singh
PW6 was	 not present  in the house at that time. He returned
from his  work late  in	 the  evening.	The  mother  of	 the
prosecutrix, Smt.  Gurdev kaur	PW7, narrated the episode to
her husband  Tirlok Singh  PW6 on  his arrival.	 Her  father
straightaway  contacted	  Sarpanch  Joginder  Singh  of	 the
village. A panchayat was convened. Matter was brought to the
notice of  the Sarpanch	 of village  Pakhowal also. Both the
Sarpanches, tried  to affect  a compromise  on 1.4.1984	 but
since the  panchayat could not give any justice of relief to
the prosecutrix,  she alongwith	 her father proceeded to the
police station Raikot to lodge a report about the occurrence
with the  police. When	they reached  at  the  bus  adda  of
village Pakhowal,  the police  met them	 and  she  made	 her
statement, Ex.	PD, before ASI Raghubir Chand PW who made an
endorsement, Ex.  PD/1 and  sent the statement Ex. PD of the
prosecutrix to the police station Raikot for registration of
the case  on the  basis of  which formal  FIR Ex.  PD/2	 was
registered by SI Malkiat Singh. ASI Raghubir Chand then took
the prosecutrix	 and her mother to the primary health centre
Pakhowal for medical examination of the prosecutrix. She was
medically examined  by lady  doctor Dr. Sukhwinder Kaur, PW1
on 2.4.84,  who found  that the hymen of the prosecutrix was
lacerated with	fine rediate tears, swollen and painful. Her
pubic  hair   were  also   found  mated.  According  to	 PW1
intercourse with  the  prosecutrix  could  be  "one  of	 the
reasons for laceration which I found in her hymen". She went
on to  say that	 the possibility could not be ruled out that
the prosecutrix "was not habitual to intercourse earlier."
During the	 course of  investigation, the	police	took
into possession	 a sealed  percel handed  over by  the	lady
doctor containing  the salwar of the prosecutrix alongwith 5
slides of  vaginal smears  and one  sealed phial  containing
pubic hair  of the  prosecutrix, vide  memo Ex.	 PK. On	 the
pointing out  of the  prosecutrix, the investigating officer
prepared the rough site plan Ex. PF, of the place from where
she  had   been	 abducted.  The	 prosecutrix  also  led	 the
investigating officer  to the tubewell kotha of Ranjit Singh
where she  had	been  wrongfully  confined  and	 raped.	 The
investigating officer  prepared a  rough site  plan  of	 the
Kotha Ex.  PM. A search was made for the accused on 2.4.1984
but they  were not  found. They	 were also  not traceable on
3.4.1984, inspite  of a raid being conducted at their houses
by the	ASI. On	 5.4.1984 Jagjit Singh alias Bawa and Ranjit
Singh were  produced before  the  investigating	 officer  by
Gurbachan Singh	 and Jagjit  Singh  on	the  same  day	were
produced before Dr. B.L. Bansal PW3 for medical examination.
The doctor  opined that both the accused were fit to perform
sexual intercourse.  Gurmit Singh respondent was arrested on
9.4.1984 by  SI Malkiat	 Singh. He  was also  got  medically
examined on  9.4.1984 from  Dr. B.L.  Bansal PW3  who opined
that  Gurmit   Singh  was   also  fit	to  perform   sexual
intercourse. The  sealed parcels  containing the  slides  of
vaginal smears,	 the  pubic  hair  and	the  salwar  of	 the
prosecutrix, were  sent to the chemical examiner. The report
of the	chemical examiner  revealed that  semen was found on
the slides  of vaginal smear though no spermatozoa was found
either on  the pubic  hair or the salwar of the prosecutrix.
On  completion	 of  the   investigation,  respondents	were
challaned and  were charged for offences under
Sections 363
,
366
,
368
,
376
IPC.
With a  view to connect the respondents with the crime,
the  prosecution   examined  Dr.   Sukhwinder	Kaur,	PW1;
Prosecutrix, PW2; Dr. B.L. Bansal, PW3; Tirlok Singh, father
of  the	  prosecutrix,	PW6;  Gurdev  Kaur,  mother  of	 the
prosecutrix, PW7;  Gurbachan Singh,  PW8; Malkit  Singh, PW9
and SI	Raghubir hand  PW10, besides,  some formal witnesses
like the draftsman etc. The prosecution tendered in evidence
affidavits of  some of the constables, whose evidence was of
a formal nature as also the report of the chemical examiner,
Ex. PM.	 In their  statements recorded under Section 313 Cr.
P.C. the  respondents  denied  the  prosecution	 allegations
against them.  Jagjit Singh  respondent stated that it was a
false case foisted on him on account of his enemity with the
Sarpanch of  village Pakhowal. He stated that he had married
a Canadian girl in the village Gurdwara, which was not liked
to by the sarpanch and therefore the sarpanch was hostile to
him and	 had got him falsely implicated in this case. Gurmit
Singh -respondent  took the  stand that	 he had been falsely
implicated in  the case	 on account  of enemity	 between his
father and  Tirlok Singh, PW6, father of the prosecutrix. He
stated that  there was	long standing  litigation  going  on
between his  father and	 the father  of the  prosecutrix and
their family  members were  not even  on speaking terms with
each other.  He went on to add that on 1.4.1984 he was given
beating by Tirlok Singh PW6, on grounds of suspicion that he
might have  instigated some  persons to	 abduct his daughter
and in	retaliation he and his elder brother on the next day
had given  beating to  Tirlok Singh, PW6 and also abused him
and on	that account  Tirlok Singh  PW, in consultation with
the police  had got  him falsely  implicated  in  the  case.
Ranjit Singh  respondent also  alleged false implication but
gave no	 reasons for  having been falsely implicated. Jagjit
Singh alias  Bawa produced  DW-1 Kuldip	 Singh and DW-2 MHC,
Amarjit Singh  in defence and tendered in evidence Ex. DC, a
photostat copy	of  his	 passport  and	Ex.  DD	 copy  of  a
certificate of	his marriage with the Canadian girl. He also
tendered into  evidence	 photographs  marked  `C'  and	`D',
evidencing his	marriage with  the Canadian  girl. The other
two accused however did not lead any defence evidence.
The trial	court first  dealt with the prosecution case
relating  to   the  abduction  of  the	prosecutrix  by	 the
respondents and observed:
"The first point for appreciation before
     me would  arise whether this part of the
     prosecution story	stands	fortified  by
     any cogent	 or reliable evidence or not.
     There  is	a  bald	 allegation  only  of
     (prosecutrix-name omitted)	 that she was
     forcibly abducted in a car. In the F.I.R
     she stated	 that she  was abducted in an
     Ambassador Car  of	 blue  colour.	After
     going through  the evidence, I am of the
     view that this thing has been introduced
     by the prosecutrix or by their father or
     by the thanedar just to give the gravity
     of offence.  (Prosecutrix name  omitted)
     was tested	 about the particulars of the
     car and  she is  so ignorant  about  the
     make etc.	of the	car that entire story
     that she was abducted in the car becomes
     doubtful.	She   stated  in  her  cross-
     examination at  page No.8	that the make
     of	 the   car  was	  Master.   She	  was
     pertinently asked	whether the  make  of
     the car  was  Ambassador  of  Fiat.  The
     witness replied that she cannot tell the
     make of  the car. But when she was asked
     as	 to   the  difference  between	Fiat,
     Ambassador or Master car, she was unable
     to explain	 the difference amongst these
     vehicles.	So,   it  appears   that  the
     allegations that  she was	abducted in a
     Fiat Car  by all  the three  accused and
     the driver,  is an imaginary story which
     has been given either by the thanedar of
     by the father of the prosecutrix."
"If the  three known  accused are in the
     clutches  of   the	 police,  it  is  not
     difficult for  the I.O.  to come to know
     about the	car, the  name of  its driver
     etc., but	strange enough,	 SI  Raghubir
     Chand has shown pitiable negligence when
     he could  not find	 out the  car  driver
     inspite of the fact that he directed the
     investigation on  these lines. He had to
     admit that he made search for taking the
     car into  possession allegedly  used  in
     the occurrence.  He could	not find  out
     the name of the driver nor could he find
     out  which	  car  was   used.  In	these
     circumstances, it looks to be improbable
     that  any	car  was  also	used  in  the
     alleged abduction". (Omission of name of
     the prosecutris - ours)
     The trial court further commented :
"On 30th  March, 1984  she was  forcibly
     abducted by  four desperate  persons who
     were out  and out	to molest her honour.
     It has  been admitted by the prosecutrix
     that she  was taken through the bus adda
     of Pakhowal  via metalled	road. It  has
     come in  the evidence  that it is a busy
     center. Inspite of that fact she has not
     raised  any  alarm,  so  as  to  attract
     persons  that  she	 was  being  forcibly
     taken. The	 height of  her own unnatural
     conduct is	 that she  was	left  by  the
     accused at	 the same  point on  the next
     morning. The  accused would  be the last
     person  to	  extend  sympathy   to	  the
     prosecutrix. Had it been so, the natural
     conduct of	 the  prosecutrix  was	first
     torush to	the  house  of	her  maternal
     uncle to  apprise him  that she had been
     forcibly abducted	on the	previous day.
     The witness  after her being left at the
     place of  abduction  lightly  takes  her
     examination. She  does not	 complain  to
     the lady  teachers who  were deployed to
     keep  a   watch  on  the  girl  students
     because these  students are to appear in
     the center	 of Boys School. She does not
     complain to  anybody nor her friend that
     she was raped during the previous night.
     She prefers  her examination rather than
     to go  to the  house of  her parents  or
     relations. Thereafter,  she goes  to her
     village Mangal Kalan and informs for the
     first time her mother that she was raped
     on the  previous night. This part of the
     prosecution story	does not  look to  be
     probable."
The trial	court, thus,  disbelieved the version of the
prosecutrix basically  for  the	 reasons;  (i)	"she  is  so
ignorant about	the make  etc. of  the car that entire story
that  she   was	 abducted   in	the  car  becomes  doubtful"
particularly because  she could	 not explain  the difference
between a Fiat car, Ambassador car or a Master car; (ii) the
investigating officer had "shown pitiable negligence" during
the investigation by not tracing out the car and the driver;
(iii) that  the prosecutrix  did not  raise any	 alarm while
being abducted	even though  she had  passed through the bus
adda of	 village Pakhowal  (iv) that the story of abduction"
has been  introduced by	 the prosecutrix or by her father or
by the thanedar just to give the gravity of offence" and (v)
that no	 corroboration of  the statement  of the prosecutrix
was available  on the  record and  that the  story that	 the
accused had  left her  near the	 school next morning was not
believable because  the accused could have no "sympathy" for
her.
The trial	court also  disbelieved the  version of	 the
prosecutrix regarding  rape. It	 found that the testimony of
the prosecutrix	 did not  inspire confidence for the reasons
(i) that there had been delay in lodging the FIR and as such
the chances of false implication of the accused could not be
ruled out.  According to  the trial  court Trilok  Singh PW6
became certain	on 1.4.84  that there  was no outcome of the
meeting between	 the panchayats	 of Nangalkhurd and Pakhowal
therefore there	 was no	 justification for  him not  to have
lodged the  report on  1.4.84 itself  and since Trilok Singh
had " entered into consultations with his wife as to whether
to  lodge   the	 report	 or  not,  it  rendered	 the  matter
doubtful." (ii)	 that the  medical evidence did not help the
prosecution case.  The trial  court  observed  that  in	 her
cross-examination PW1  lady doctor had admitted that whereas
inter-course with  the	prosecutrix  could  be	one  of	 the
reasons for  the laceration  of the  hymen "there  could  be
other reasons  also for	 that laceration".  The trial  court
noticed that the lady doctor had inserted a vaginal speculum
for taking  swabs from	the posterior  vaginal fornix of the
prosecutrix for	 preparing slides and since the width of the
speculum was  about two	 fingers, the  possibility that	 the
prosecutrix was	 habituated to sexual inter-course could not
be ruled out". The trial court observed that the prosecutrix
was "flighting	her imagination	 in order  to  rope  in	 the
accused persons"  and that  implicit reliance  could not  be
placed on the testimony "of such a girl"; (iii) there was no
independent corroboration of her testimony and (iv) that the
accused had been implicated on account of enemity as alleged
by the	accused in  their statements  recorded under Section
313 Cr. P.C.
     The grounds  on which  the trial  court disbelieved the
version of  the	 prosecutrix  are  not	at  all	 sound.	 The
findings recorded  by the  trial court rebel against realism
and lose  their sanctity  and credibility.  The	 court	lost
sight of  the fact  that the  prosecutrix is a village girl.
She was a student of Xth Class. It was wholly irrelevant and
immaterial  whether  she  was  ignorant	 of  the  difference
between a  Fiat, an  Ambassador or  a Master car. Again, the
statement of  the prosecutrix  at the trial that she did not
remember the  colour of	 the car,  though she  had given the
colour of  the car  in the  FIR was of no material effect on
the reliability	 of her	 testimony. No	fault could  also be
found with  the prosecution  version on	 the ground that the
prosecutrix had	 not raised  an alarm  while being abducted.
The prosecutrix in her statement categorically asserted that
as soon as she was pushed inside the car5 she was threatened
by the	accused to  keep quiet	and not	 to raise  any alarm
otherwise she  would be killed. Under these circumstances to
discredit the prosecutrix for not raising an alarm while the
car was	 passing through  the Bus  Adda	 is  traverisity  of
justice. The court over-looked the situation in which a poor
helpless minor	girl had  found herself	 in the	 company  of
three desperate	 young men  who	 were  threatening  her	 and
preventing  her	 from  raising	any  alram.  Again,  if	 the
investigating officer  did  not	 conduct  the  investigation
properly or was negligent in not being able to trace out the
driver or the car, how car that become a ground to discredit
the testimony  of the  prosecutrix? The	 prosecutrix had  no
control over  the investigating agency and the negligence of
an investigating officer could not affect the credibility of
the statement  of the prosecutrix. Trial Court fell in error
for discrediting  the testimony	 of the	 prosecutrix on that
account. In  our opinion,  there was no delay in the lodging
of the	FIR either  and if  at all there was some delay, the
same has not only been properly explained by the prosecution
but in	the facts  and circumstances  of the  case was	also
natural. The courts cannot over-look the fact that in sexual
offences delay	in the	lodging of  the FIR  can be  du