CASE: Kesavananda Bharati v State of Kerala (1973)
SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/257876/

[Cites
573
, Cited by
999
]
Supreme Court of India
Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru ... vs State Of Kerala And Anr on 24 April, 1973
Equivalent citations: AIR 1973 SUPREME COURT 1461, 1973 4 SCC 225
Bench:
S.M. Sikri
,
A.N. Grover
,
A.N. Ray
,
D.G. Palekar
,
H.R. Khanna
,
J.M. Shelat
,
K.K. Mathew
,
K.S. Hegde
,
M.H. Beg
,
P. Jaganmohan Reddy
,
S.N. Dwivedi
,
Y.V.Chandrachud
CASE NO.:
Writ Petition (civil)  135 of 1970

PETITIONER:
Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru and Ors

RESPONDENT:
State of Kerala and Anr

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 24/04/1973

BENCH:
S.M. Sikri & A.N. Grover & A.N. Ray & D.G. Palekar & H.R. Khanna & J.M. Shelat & K.K. Mathew & K.S. Hegde & M.H. Beg & P. Jaganmohan Reddy & S.N. Dwivedi & Y.V.Chandrachud

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

W.P.(C)    135   OF   1970    
Appellants: His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru and Ors. 
Vs. 
Respondent: State of Kerala and Anr.
Decided On: 24.04.1973

Hon'ble Judges:
S.M. Sikri, C.J., A.N. Grover, A.N. Ray, D.G. Palekar, H.R. Khanna, J.M. Shelat, K.K. 
Mathew, K.S. Hegde M.H. Beg, P. Jaganmohan Reddy, S.N. Dwivedi and Y.V. 
Chandrachud, JJ.
JUDGMENT

S.M. Sikri, C.J.
1. I propose to divide my judgment into eight parts. Part I will deal with Introduction;
Part II with interpretation of Golakhnath case; Part III with the interpretation of the 
original
Article 368
, as it existed prior to its amendment; Part IV with the validity of the
Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act
; Part V with the validity of
Section 2
of 
the Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act; Part VI with the validity of
Section 3
of 
the Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act; Part VII with Constitution (Twenty-
ninth Amendment) Act; and Part VIII with conclusions.
PART I-Introduction
2. All the six writ petitions involve common questions as to the validity of the Twenty-
fourth, Twenty-fifth and Twenty-ninth Amendments of the Constitution. I may give a few 
facts in Writ petition No. 135 of 1970 to show how the question arises in this petition. 
Writ Petition No. 135 of 1970 was filed by the petitioner on March 21, 1970 under
Article 32
of the Constitution for enforcement of his fundamental rights under
Articles 
25
, 26
, 14
, 19(1)(f)
and
31
of the Constitution. He prayed that the provisions of the
Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1963
(Act 1 of 1964) as amended by the
Kerala Land Reforms 
(Amendment) Act
1969 (Act 35 of 1969) be declared unConstitutional, ultra vires and 
void. He further prayed for an appropriate writ or order to issue during the pendency of 
the petition. This Court issued rule nisi on March 25, 1970.
3. During the pendency of the writ petition, the
Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act
1971
(Kerala Act
No. 25 of 1971) was passed which received the assent of the President 
on August 7, 1971. The petitioner filed an application for permission to urge additional 
grounds and to impugn the Constitutional validity of the
Kerala Land Reforms 
(Amendment) Act
1971
(Kerala Act
No. 25 of 1971).
4.
In the meantime, the Supreme Court by its judgment dated April 26, 1971 in
Kunjukutty Sahib v. State of Kerala
[1972] S.C.C. 364 (Civil Appeals Nos. 143, 203-242, 
274 & 309 of 1971).
Judgment dated April 26, 1971 upheld the majority judgment of the 
Kerala High Court in V.N. Narayanan Nair v. State of Kerala A.I.R. 1971 Kerala 98 
whereby certain, sections of the Act were struck down.
5.
The Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act
came into force on November 5, 
1971, the
Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act
came into force on April 20, 1972 
and the
Constitution (Twenty-ninth Amendment) Act
came into force on June 9, 1972. 
The effect of the Twenty-ninth Amendment of the Constitution was that it inserted the 
following Acts in the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution:
65.
The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1969
(Kerala Act
35 of 
1969).
66. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1971
(Kerala Act
25 of 
1971).
6. The petitioner then moved an application for urging additional grounds and for 
amendment of the writ petition in order to challenge the above Constitutional 
amendments.
7. The Court allowed the application for urging additional grounds and for amendment of 
the writ petition on August 10, 1972 and issued notices to the Advocates-General to 
appear before this Court and take such part in the proceedings as they may be advised.
8. When the case was placed before the Constitutional bench, it referred this case to a 
larger bench to determine the validity of the impugned Constitutional amendments.
9. Similar orders were passed in the other writ petitions.
10. The larger bench was accordingly constituted. It was then felt that it would be 
necessary to decide whether
I.C. Golak Nath v. State of Punjab
[1967] 2 S.C.R. 762 was 
rightly decided or not. However, as I see it, the question whether Golak Nath's [1967] 2 
S.C.R. 762 case was rightly decided or not does not matter because the real issue is 
different and of much greater importance, the issue being : what is the extent of the 
amending power conferred by
Article 368
of the Constitution, apart from
Article 13(2)
, 
on Parliament ?
11. The respondents claim that Parliament can abrogate fundamental rights such as 
freedom of speech and expression, freedom to form associations or unions, and freedom 
of religion. They claim that democracy can even be replaced and one-party rule 
established. Indeed, short of repeal of the Constitution, any form of Government with no 
freedom to the citizens can be set up by Parliament by exercising its powers under Article
368.
12. On the side of the petitioners it is urged that the power of Parliament is much more 
limited. The petitioners say that the Constitution gave the Indian citizen freedoms which 
were to subsist for ever and the Constitution was drafted to free the nation from any 
future tyranny of the representatives of the people. It is this freedom from tyranny which, 
according to the petitioners, has been taken away by the impugned
Article 31C
which has 
been inserted by the Twenty-fifth Amendment. If
Article 31C
is valid, they say, hereafter 
Parliament and State Legislatures and not the Constitution, will determine how much 
freedom is good for the citizens.
13. These cases raise grave issues. But however grave the issues may be, the answer must 
depend on the interpretation of the words in
Article 368
, read in accordance with the 
principles of interpretation which are applied to the interpretation of a Constitution given 
by the people to themselves.
14. I must interpret
Article 368
in the setting of our Constitution, in the background of 
our history and in the light of our aspirations and hopes, and other relevant 
circumstances. No other Constitution in the world is like ours. No other Constitution 
combines under its wings such diverse peoples, numbering now more than 550 millions, 
with different languages and religions and in different stages of economic development, 
into one nation, and no other nation is faced with such vast socio-economic problems.
15. I need hardly observe that I am not interpreting an ordinary statute, but a Constitution 
which apart from setting up a machinery for government, has a noble and grand vision. 
The vision was put in words in the Preamble and carried out in part by conferring 
fundamental rights on the people. The vision was directed to be further carried out by the 
application of directive principles.
PART II-Interpretation of Golak Nath
's Case.
16. Before proceeding with the main task, it is necessary to ask : what was decided in
I.C. 
Golak Nath v. State of Punjab
[1967] 2 S.C.R. 762 ?
In order to properly appreciate that 
case, it is necessary first to have a look at
Sri Sankari Prasad Singh Deo v. Union of India 
and State of Bihar
[1952] S.C.R. 89 and Sajjan Singh v. State of Rajasthan [1965] 1 
S.C.R. 933.
17.
The Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951
, which inserted inter alia
Articles 31A
and
31B
in the Constitution was the subject matter of decision in Sankari Prasad's [1952] 
S.C.R. 89 case. The main arguments relevant to the present case which were advanced in 
support of the petition before this Court were summarised by Patanjali Sastri, J. as he 
then was, as follows:
First, the power of amending the Constitution provided for under
Article 
368
was conferred not on Parliament but on the two Houses of Parliament 
as designated body and, therefore, the provisional Parliament was not 
competent to exercise that power under
Article 379.
Fourthly, in any case
Article 368
is a complete code in itself and does not 
provide for any amendment being made in the bill after it has been 
introduced in the House. The bill in the present case having been 
admittedly amended in several particulars during its passage through the 
House, the Amendment Act cannot be said to have been passed in 
conformity with the procedure prescribed in
Article 368.
Fifthly, the Amendment Act, in so far as it purports to take away or 
abridge the rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution, falls within the 
prohibition of
Article 13(2).
X X X
18. As stated in the head note, this Court held:
The provisional Parliament is competent to exercise the power of 
amending the Constitution under
Article 368.
The fact that the said article 
refers to the two Houses of the Parliament and the President separately and 
not to the Parliament, does not lead to the inference that the body which is 
invested with the power to amend is not the Parliament but a different 
body consisting of the two Houses.
The words "all the powers conferred by the provisions of this Constitution 
on Parliament" in
Article 379
are not confined to such powers as could be 
exercised by the provisional Parliament consisting of a single chamber, 
but are wide enough to include the power to amend the Constitution 
conferred by
Article 368.
19. I may mention that Mr. Seervai contends that the conclusion just mentioned was 
wrong and that the body that amends the Constitution under
Article 368
is not 
Parliament.
20. The Court further held:
The view that
Article 368
is a complete code in itself in respect of the 
procedure provided by it and does not contemplate any amendment of a 
Bill for amendment of the Constitution after it has been introduced, and 
that if the Bill is amended during its passage through the House, the 
Amendment Act cannot be said to have been passed in conformity with 
the procedure prescribed by
Article 368
and would be invalid, is 
erroneous.
Although "law" must ordinarily include Constitutional law there is a clear 
demarcation between ordinary law which is made in the exercise of 
legislative power and Constitutional law, which is made in the exercise of 
constituent power. In the context of
Article 13
, "law" must be taken to 
mean rules or regulations made in exercise of ordinary legislative power 
and not amendments to the Constitution made in the exercise of 
constituent power with the result that
Article 13(2)
does not affect 
amendments made under
Article 368.
21. Although the decision in Sankari Prasad's [1952] S.C.R. 89 case was not challenged 
in Sajjan Singh's [1965] 1 S.C.R. 933 case, Gajendragadkar, C.J. thought it fit to give 
reasons for expressing full concurrence with that decision.
22. The only contention before the Court was that "since it appears that the powers 
prescribed by
Article 226
are likely to be affected by the intended amendment of the 
provisions contained in Part III, the bill introduced for the purpose of making such an 
amendment, must attract the proviso, and as the impugned Act has admittedly not gone 
through the procedure prescribed by the proviso, it is invalid". According to 
Gajendragadkar, C.J. "that raised the question about the construction of the provisions 
contained in
Article 368
and the relation between the substantive part of
Article 368
with 
its proviso.
23. The Chief Justice came to the conclusion that "as a matter of construction, there is no 
escape from the conclusion that
Article 368
provides for the amendment of the provisions 
contained in Part III without imposing on Parliament an obligation to adopt the procedure 
prescribed by the proviso.
24. The learned Chief Justice thought that the power to amend in the context was a very 
wide power and it could not be controlled' by the literal dictionary meaning of the word 
"amend". He expressed his agreement with the reasoning of Patanjali Sastri, J. regarding 
the applicability of
Article 13(2)
to Constitution Amendment Acts passed under Article
368. He further held that when
Article 368
confers on Parliament the right to amend the 
Constitution, it can be exercised over all the provisions of the Constitution. He thought 
that "if the Constitution-makers had intended that any future amendment of the 
provisions in regard to fundamental rights should be subject to
Article 13(2)
, they would 
have taken the precaution of making a clear provision in that behalf.
25. He seemed to be in agreement with the following observations of Kania, C.J. in
A.K. 
Gopalan v. The State of Madras
[1950] S.C.R. 88 at p. 100:
the inclusion of
Article 13(1)
and
(2)
in the Constitution appears to be a 
matter of abundant caution. Even in their absence if any of the 
fundamental rights was infringed by any legislative enactment, the Court 
has always the power to declare the enactment, to the extent it transgresses 
the limits, invalid.
26. He was of the view that even though the relevant provisions of Part III can be justly 
described as the very foundation and the cornerstone of the democratic way of life 
ushered in this country by the Constitution, it cannot be said that the fundamental rights 
guaranteed to the citizens are eternal and inviolate in the sense that they can never be 
abridged or amended.
27. According to him, it was legitimate to assume that the Constitution-makers visualised 
that Parliament would be competent to make amendments in these rights so as to meet the 
challenge of the problems which may arise in the course of socio-economic progress and 
development of the country.
28. Hidayatullah, J., as he then was, agreed with the Chief Justice that the 17th 
Amendment was valid even though the procedure
laid down in
the proviso to
Article 368
had not been followed. But he expressed his difficulty in accepting the part of the 
reasoning in Sankari Prasad's [1952] S.C.R. 89 case.
29. He observed as follows:
It is true that there is no complete definition of the word "law"' in the 
article but it is significant that the definition does not seek to exclude 
Constitutional amendments which it would have been easy to indicate in 
the definition by adding "but shall not include an amendment of the 
Constitution".
30. He further observed:
The meaning of
Article 13
thus depends on the sense in which the word 
"law" in
Article 13(2)
is to be understood. If an amendment can be said to 
fall within the term "law", the Fundamental Rights become "eternal and 
inviolate" to borrow the language of the Japanese Constitution.
Article 13
is then on par with
Article 5
of the American Federal Constitution in its 
immutable prohibition as long as it stands.
31. According to him "Our Preamble is more akin in nature to the American Declaration 
of Independence (July 4, 1776) then to the preamble to the Constittuion of the United 
States. It does not make any grant of power but it gives a direction and purpose to the 
Constitution which is reflected in Parts III and IV. Is it to be imagined that a two-thirds 
majority of the two Houses at any time is all that is necessary to alter it without even 
consulting the States ? It is not even included in the proviso to
Article 368
and it is 
difficult to think that as it has not the protection of the proviso it must be within the main 
part of
Article 368.
32. He further observed:
I would require stronger reason than those given in
Sankari Prasad
's case 
to make me accept the view that Fundamental Rights were not really 
fundamental but were intended to be within the powers of amendment in 
common with the other parts of the Constitution and without the 
concurrence of the States.
33. He held:
What
Article 368
does is to lay down the manner of amendment and the 
necessary conditions for the effectiveness of the amendment....
The Constitution gives so many assurances in Part III that it would be 
difficult to think that they were the play-things of a special majority. To 
hold this would mean prima facie that the most solemn parts of our 
Constitution stand on the same footing as any other provision and even on 
a less firm ground than one on which the articles mentioned in the proviso 
stand.
34. Mudholkar, J. although agreeing that the writ petition should be dismissed, raised 
various doubts and he said that he was reserving his opinion on the question whether
Sankari Prasad
's case was rightly decided. He thought:
The language of
Article 368
is plain enough to show that the action of 
Parliament in amending the Constitution is a legislative act like one in 
exercise of its normal legislative power. The only difference in respect of 
an amendment of the Constitution is that the Bill amending the 
Constitution has to be passed by a special majority (here I have in mind 
only those amedments which do not attract the proviso to
Article 368
). 
The result of a legislative action of a legislature cannot be other than 'law' 
and, therefore, it seems to me that the fact that the legislation deals with 
the amendment of a provision of the Constitution would not make its 
result any the less a 'law'.
35. He observed:
It is true that the Constitution does not directly prohibit the amendment of 
Part III. But it would indeed be strange that rights which are considered to 
be fundamental and which include one which is guaranteed by the 
Constitution (vide
Article 32
) should be more easily capable of being 
abridged or restricted than any of the matters referred to in the proviso to
Article 368
some of which are perhaps less vital than fundamental rights. 
It is possible, as suggested by my learned brother, that
Article 368
merely 
lays down the procedure to be followed for amending the Constitution and 
does not confer a power to amend the Constitution which, I think, has to 
be ascertained from the provision sought to be amended or other relevant 
provisions or the preamble.
36. Later, he observed:
Above all, it formulated a solemn and dignified preamble which appears to 
be an epitome of the basic features of the Constitution. Can it not be said 
that these are indica of the intention of the Constituent Assembly to give a 
permanency to the basic features of the Constitution ?
37. He posed a further question by observing:
It is also a matter for consideration whether making a change in a basic 
feature of the Constitution can be regarded merely as an amendment or 
would it be, in effect, rewriting a part of the Constitution; and if the latter, 
would it be within the purview of
Article 368 ?
38. He then stressed the prime importance of the preamble:
The Constitution indicates three modes of amendments and assuming that 
the provisions of
Article 368
confer power on Parliament to amend the 
Constitution, it will still have to be considered whether as long as the 
preamble stands unamended, that power can be exercised with respect to 
any of the basic features of the Constitution.
To illustrate my point, as long as the words 'sovereign democratic 
republic' are there, could the Constitution be amended so as to depart from 
the democratic form of Government or its republic character? If that 
cannot be done, then, as long as the words "Justice, social, economic and 
political etc.," are there could any of the rights enumerated in
Articles 14
to 19, 21, 25, 31 and 32 be taken away ? If they cannot, it will be for 
consideration whether they can be modified.
It has been said, no doubt, that the preamble is not a part of our 
Constitution.