CASE: Machhi Singh v State of Punjab (1983)
SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/545301/

[Cites
7
, Cited by
785
]
Supreme Court of India
Machhi Singh And Others vs State Of Punjab on 20 July, 1983
Equivalent citations: 1983 AIR 957, 1983 SCR (3) 413, AIR 1983 SUPREME COURT 957, 1983 3 SCC 470, 1983 2 CRIMES 268, 1983 SCC(CRI) 681
Author:
M.P.  Thakkar
Bench:
M.P.  Thakkar
,
Syed Murtaza Fazalali
,
A.  Varadarajan
PETITIONER:
MACHHI SINGH AND OTHERS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF PUNJAB

DATE OF JUDGMENT20/07/1983

BENCH:
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)
BENCH:
THAKKAR, M.P. (J)
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
VARADARAJAN, A. (J)

CITATION:
 1983 AIR  957		  1983 SCR  (3) 413
 1983 SCC  (3) 470	  1983 SCALE  (2)1
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1983 SC1155	 (3,4)
 F	    1987 SC1721	 (3)
 R	    1988 SC1785	 (14)
 R	    1988 SC1883	 (322)
 R	    1989 SC1335	 (10)
 E&D	    1989 SC1456	 (12,13)


ACT:
     Penal Code	 (Act 45  of  1860),  Section  302-Sentence-
Imposition of death sentence-"Rarest of rare cases formula"-
Guidelines to be adopted in identification of rarest of rare
cases, explained-
Evidence  Act
(Act  1 of  1872)
Section  9-
Witnesses  indentifying	  culprits  in	the  light  shed  by
lantern-Appreciation of-Dying declaration, non-recording of-
Evidentiary value-Doctrine  of benefit	of doubt, when to be
invoked.



HEADNOTE:
     A feud  between two  families has	resulted  in  tragic
consequences. Seventeen	 lives were  lost in the course of a
series of  five incidents which occurred in quick succession
in five different villages, situated in the vicinity of each
other, in  Punjab, on the night between August 12 and August
13, 1977. The seventeen persons who lost their lives and the
three  who  substained	injuries  included  men,  women	 and
children related to one Amar Singh and his sister Piaro Bai.
     In this  connection one  Machhi Singh  and	 his  eleven
companions, close  relatives and  associates were prosecuted
in five	 sessions cases,  each pertaining  to the  concerned
village in  which the  killings took place. Machhi Singh was
the common accused at each trial. The composition of his co-
accused differed number-wise and identity-wise from trial to
trial At the conclusion of the series of trials, the accused
found guilty  were convicted  under appropriate	 provisions.
Four of	 them were  awarded death sentence, whereas sentence
of imprisonment	 for life  was imposed on nine of them. They
were also  convicted for  different offences and appropriate
punishment was inflicted on each of them in that behalf. The
order of  conviction and  sentence gave	 rise to five murder
references and	fourteen appeals  by the convicts before the
High Court  of Punjab and Haryana. Having lost their appeals
and  the   death  sentences   having  been  con-firmed,	 the
appellants have come in appeal by way of special leave.
     The Court considered the following:
     (a) What  normal guidelines are to be followed so as to
identify the  "rarest of  rare cases"  formula for  imposing
death sentence,	 as spelled  out in Bachan Singh v. State of
Punjab, [1980]	2 SCR  864; (b) Reliability of eye witnesses
to a  crime under  light shed by the lantern in a village to
identify connect  an accused to the crime; (c) invocation of
the doctrine of benefit of doubt;
414
and (d)	 the effect  of	 non-summoning	the  magistrate	 for
recording dying declaration.
     Allowing the  Criminal Appeals Nos. 79/81 and 86/81 and
dismissing the other appeals, the Court
^
     HELD :  1:1. The  extreme penalty	of death need not be
inflicted except  in gravest  cases of	extreme culpability.
Before opting for the death penalty the circumstances of the
'offender' also	 require  to  be  taken	 into  consideration
alongwith   the	  circumstances	  of   the   'crime'.	Life
imprisonment is the rule and death sentence is an exception.
In other words death sentence must be imposed only when life
imprisonment  appears	to  be	 an  altogether	  inadequate
punishment having  regard to  the relevant  circumstances of
the crime,  and provided,  and only  provided, the option to
impose	sentence   of  imprisonment   for  life	  cannot  be
conscientiously exercised  having regard  to the  nature and
circumstances  of   the	  crime	  and	all   the   relevant
circumstances. A balance sheet of aggravating and mitigating
circumstances has  to be  drawn	 up  and  in  doing  so	 the
mitigating circumstances  has to  be accorded full weightage
and a  just balance has to be struck between the aggravating
and  the  mitigating  circumstances  before  the  option  is
exercised. [433 A-E]
     Bachan Singh  v. State  of Punjab	[1980] 2 S.C.C. 684,
relied on,
     1;2. In  order to apply these guidelines inter-alia the
following questions  may be asked and answers : (a) Is there
something uncommon about the crime which renders sentence of
imprisonment for  life inadequate  and called  for  a  death
sentence ?  (b) Are the circumstances of the crime such that
there is  no alternative  but to  impose death sentence even
after  according   maximum  weightage	to  the	  mitigating
circumstances which speak in favour of the offender. [433 E-
G]
     1:3. If  upon taking  an overall global view of all the
circumstances in  the light of the aforesaid proposition and
taking into  account the answers to the questions posed here
in above,  the circumstances of the case are such that death
sentence is  warranted, the  court would  proceed to  do so.
[433 G-H]
     2. The  villagers living  in villages where electricity
has not	 reached as  yet, get accustomed to seeing things in
the  light   shed  by	the  lantern.  Their  eyesight	gets
conditioned and	 becomes accustomed  to the situation. Their
powers	of  seeing  are	 therefore  not	 diminished  by	 the
circumstance that  the incident	 is witnessed  in the  light
shed by the lantern and not electric light. Paucity of light
cannot, therefore,  improbablise the commission of the crime
by the accused. [417 C-D]
     3:1. When	a piece	 of evidence  introduced and  relied
upon by the prosecution itself creates a doubt (a reasonable
doubt) as  regards the	complicity of  the accused,  even if
there are  no infirmities in other evidence, the doctrine of
benefit of  doubt must	be invoked by the court in favour of
the accused. [422 F-G]
415
     In the  instant case,  though there  is no infirmity in
the evidence  of PW  Amar Singh	 and PW	 Mohindo to  connect
Mohinder Singh	to the crime, the fact that the second rifle
used in	 the commission	 of  crime  having  been  originally
issued	to   one  Kashmir   Singh  does	 not  satisfactorily
establish the link.
						[422 B, E-F]
     3:2. When	the deceased  was making  good recovery	 and
having regard  to the  condition of his health, no danger to
his  life   was	 apprehended  and  therefore  in  that	fact
situation, the	magistrate was	not summoned,  no fault	 can
legitimately be	 found on this score for getting the benefit
of doubt in favour of the accused. Any statement made to the
police by  such deceased  can be  subsequently allowed to be
treated as dying declaration and evidence scanned. [429 G-H]



JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeals Nos.
78-79, 80-84, 85-86, 87 and 88-89 of 1981 and 419 of 1982.
Appeals by	 Special leave	petitions from	the Judgment
and Order  dated the  Ist September,  1980 of the Punjab and
Haryana High  Court in	Murder Reference Nos. 14, 18, 16 and
1979 and  1 of 1980 and Criminal Appeal Nos. 933. 1176, 935,
977, 978, 972, 992, 979, 976, 980, 981, 991, 827 and 1105 of
1979.
R. L. Kohli and R. C. Kohli for the Appellants.
     Harbans Singh and D. D. Sharma for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     THAKKAR, J:  Protagonists of  the "an  eye for  an eye"
philosophy demand  "death-for-death". The 'Humanists' on the
other hand  press for  the other extreme viz., "death-in-no-
case". A  synthesis has emerged in
'Bachan Singh v. State of
Punjab
(1) wherein  the	"rarest-of-rare-cases"	formula	 for
imposing death sentence in a murder case has been evolved by
this Court.  Identification of the guidelines spelled out in
'Bachan Singh'	in order  to determine	whether or not death
sentence should	 be imposed  is one of the problems engaging
our attention,	to which  we will  address ourselves  in due
course.
A feud  between two  families has	resulted  in  tragic
consequences. Seventeen	 lives were  lost in the course of a
series of  five incidents which occurred in quick succession
in five different villages, situated in the vicinity of each
other in Punjab, on a night one would like
416
to forget but cannot forget, the night between August 12 and
August 13,  1977. The seventeen persons who lost their lives
and the three who sustained injuries included men, women and
children related to one Amar Singh and his sister Piaro Bai.
In this  connection one  Machhi Singh  and	 his  eleven
companions. close  relatives and  associates were prosecuted
in five	 sessions cases,  each pertaining  to the  concerned
village in  which the  killings took place. Machhi Singh was
the common accused at each trial. The composition of his co-
accused differed number wise and identity-wise from trial to
trial. At the conclusion of the series of trials the accused
found guilty  were convicted  under  appropriate  provisions
Four of	 them were  awarded death sentence, whereas sentence
of imprisonment	 for life  was imposed on nine of them. They
were also  convicted for  different offences and appropriate
punishment was inflicted on each of them in that behalf. The
order of  conviction and  sentence gave	 rise to five murder
references and	fourteen appeals  by the convicts before the
High Court of Punjab and Haryana. The High Court heard every
individual appeal  separately, but  disposed of the group of
appeals by  a common  Judgment for  the sake of convenience.
The  present  group  of	 appeals  is  directed	against	 the
aforesaid judgment rendered by the High Court. We will treat
each of	 the appeals compartmentally, and separately, on its
own merits,  on the  basis of  the evidence  recorded at the
trial in  each sessions	 case giving  rise to the respective
appeal. But  for the  sake of convenience we will dispose of
the appeals  by this  common judgment.	In  order  to  avoid
confusion, the	occurrence in  each village will be adverted
to in the same manner in which the High Court has done viz.,
Crime No. I, IIA, IIB, III, IV and V.
Motive:
The  aspect   regarding  motive   has  been   discussed
exhaustively  in   the	third  paragraph  of  the  elaborate
judgment rendered  by the  High Court.	We need	 not set out
this aspect  at length	or examine  it in  depth This aspect
need not  therefore be	adverted to  in the  context of each
crime  over   and  over	 again	so  as	to  avoid  avoidable
repetition. Suffice  it to  say that reprisal was the motive
for the commission of the crime.
Common Criticism:
The most  serious criticism  pressed  into	 service  by
learned counsel for the appellants in each of the appeals is
common.
417
Instead of  dealing with  the identical	 criticism,  in	 the
identical manner, repeatedly, in the context of each matter,
we propose  to deal  with it at this juncture. The criticism
is this.  It was  a dark  night.  Electricity  had  not	 yet
reached the  concerned village at the material time. In each
crime the  appreciation of evidence regarding identification
has to	be made	 in the context of the fact-situation that a
lighted lantern	 was hanging  in the  court-yard  where	 the
victims were  sleeping on  the cots.  The light	 shed by the
lantern cannot	be considered  to be sufficient enough (such
is the argument) to enable the eye witnesses to identify the
culprits. This	argument has  been rightly  rebuffed by	 the
Sessions Court	and the	 High  Court,  on  the	ground	that
villagers living  in  villages	where  electricity  has	 not
reached as yet, get accustomed to seeing things in the light
shed by	 the lantern.  Their eyesight  gets conditioned	 and
becomes accustomed  to the situation. Their powers of seeing
are therefore  not diminished  by the  circumstance that the
incident is  witnessed in  the light shed by the lantern and
not electric  light. Moreover,	identification did  not pose
any serious  problem  as  the  accused	were  known  to	 the
witnesses. In  fact they  were embroiled  in a long standing
family feud.  As the culprits had not covered their faces to
conceal their  identity. it  was not  difficult to  identify
them from  their facial features, build gait etc. Light shed
by the	lantern	 was  enough  to  enable  the  witnesses  to
identify the culprits under the circumstances.
The concurrent finding of fact recorded by the Sessions
Court and the High Court in this behalf does not, therefore,
call for  interference at  the hands  of this  Court on this
score.
Now we  will address  ourselves to the facts pertaining
to the individual appeals.
CRIME No. 1.
The  occurrence   giving  rise   to   the	 proceedings
culminating in	the appeal  before this	 Court took place at
Village Alahi  Baksh Badla  at about 8.30 p.m. on August 12,
1977. Four  members of the household of PW Amar Singh became
the target  of the  assailants and  lost their	lives in the
course of  the murderous  attack. The  four victims were the
wife and  three sons  of PW  Amar Singh	 viz., (1) Biban Bai
(aged about  45); (2)  Gurcharan Singh	(aged about 15); (3)
Jagtar Singh  (aged about  10) and  (4) Balwant	 Singh (aged
about 9). As luck would have it Amar Singh the head of the
418
household and his 10 years old daughter, PW Mohindo, escaped
the murderous  assault and  survived to tell the tale of the
ghastly murder in the Court. Evidence of PW Amar Singh shows
that on	 the unfortunate  night, he  and the  members of the
household were	sleeping  in  the  courtyard.  There  was  a
lighted lantern	 in the	 courtyard which  was placed  on the
small boundary	wall of	 the kitchen.  P.W. Amar  Singh	 was
sleeping on  one cot.  PW Mohindo, his daughter who survived
the attack,  was also  sleeping in the same cot. Next to him
was another  cot on  which his	wife Biban Bai was sleeping.
And an	infant child  was sleeping with her on the same cot.
His two	 sons,	Gurcharan  Singh  and  Kulwant	Singh,	were
sleeping together  on another  cot just	 nearby.  P.W.	Amar
Singh suddenly	woke up	 on hearing the noise of the barking
of a  dog since he was half awake being apprehensive of some
trouble because	 of a  murder case  which was  pending in  a
criminal court	against his  relations. Amar Singh sprang up
on hearing  the noise  and instinctively  went inside, where
some sarkana reeds were heaped, and concealed himself there.
He was	peeping from his place of hiding and was able to see
what was happening. Barely had he done so when he espied the
five appellants, who were known to him, enter the courtyard.
Appellant Machhi  Singh and  appellant Mohinder	 Singh	were
each armed  with  a  rifle.  Their  three  companions  viz.,
Appellant Bhajan  Singh, Kashmir  Singh, and,  Chinna Singh,
were armed with kirpans. Appellant Machhi Singh fired a shot
at Biban  Bai, who  was lying  on the  cot. At the same time
appellant Mohinder  Singh fired	 a shot at Balwant Singh who
was lying  on a	 cot.  Appellant  Machhi  Singh	 then  fired
another shot at Jagtar Singh and yet another shot at Kulwant
Singh. Appellant  Mohinder Singh on his part fired a shot at
Gurucharan Singh.  It is the version of P.W. Amar Singh that
his daughter  P.W. Mohindo managed to get beneath the cot on
which he  was previously  lying while  the  assailants	were
firing at  the different  victims. The	three companions  of
appellants Machhi Singh and Mohinder Singh, namely, Kashimir
Singh, Chinna  Singh, and,  Bhajan Singh,  gave kirpan blows
which were  aimed at  the head	of Biban Bai who had already
been injured  by rifle	shots. The kirpan blows did not fall
on the head of Biban Bai but struck the upper surface of the
table which  was  lying	 nearby.  Thereafter  all  the	five
culprits fled  from there  with	 their	respective  weapons.
After day  break PW  Amar Singh	 left the  house in order to
lodge a report of the occurrence with P.W. 31 Head Constable
Wassan Singh.
419
Seven persons  were prosecuted  in connection with this
incident. Five	of them have been acquitted. Only two of the
original seven	accused, viz.,	Appellants Machhi  Singh and
Mohinder Singh	have been convicted for murder and sentenced
to death.  We propose  to deal with the appeals preferred by
them separately.
Appellant Machhi Singh:
As far  as Machhi	Singh is  concerned the	 finding  of
guilt recorded by the Session Court and affirmed by the High
Court rests on the testimony of two eye witnesses viz., P.W.
Amar Singh  and his  10	 year  old  daughter  P.W.  Mohindo.
Evidence has  also been adduced to establish that one of the
rifles used  in the course of the murderous assault had been
issued to  Machhi Singh	 in his	 capacity as  an officer  of
Punjab Homeguards.  The evidence  of  the  ballistic  expert
establishes that  the said  rifle had been recently used and
some of	 the empty  cartridges found  from the	scene of the
occurrence were	 fired from  this rifle.  This	evidence  is
further corroborated  by  the  evidence	 pertaining  to	 the
recovery of  the rifle	at the	instance of appellant Machhi
Singh which  has been accepted by the Sessions Court and the
High Court.
Learned Counsel  for the  appellant contended  that the
evidence of  the two  eye witnesses  namely, P.W. Amar Singh
and P.W.  Mohindo was  not such as could be implicity relied
upon, and  the rest  of the evidence was neither sufficient,
nor  satisfactory   enough,  to	 bring	home  the  guilt  to
appellant Machhi Singh.
The Sessions  Court and  High Court  have accepted	 the
evidence of  P.W. Amar	Singh and  his daughter P.W. Mohindo
after close  and careful  scrutiny of  the same.  We do	 not
think that  there is  any justification	 to take a different
view in	 regard to  the assessment  of their  evidence.	 The
presence of Amar Singh and his daughter Mohindo at the scene
of occurrence  is natural  inasmuch as	the occurrence	took
place at  the house of Amar Singh. Counsel for the appellant
has assailed  the finding recorded by the Sessions Court and
affirmed by  the High  Court by	 pressing into	service	 the
argument that  as there	 was only one lantern burning in the
courtyard, and as it was a dark night, it being the 14th day
of the	second half  of the  lunar  month,  Amar  Singh	 and
Mohindo could  not have	 identified the	 culprits. It  is no
doubt true  that it  was a  night preceding the 'amavashya'.
All the	 same the  evidence clearly  shows that	 a lamp	 was
burning in the courtyard. This aspect has already been dealt
420
with a	short while  ago. For  the reasons  indicated in the
course	of   the  earlier   discussion	we  think  that	 the
concurrent view	 taken by  the Sessions	 Court and  the High
Court  that   there  was  sufficient  light  to	 enable	 the
identification of the culprits must be affirmed. Besides, it
is a  pure question of appreciation of evidence which cannot
be reagitated  before us.  Even so we have considered on our
own the	 evidence on the point and we are satisfied that the
view taken  by the  Sessions Court  and the  High  Court  is
unexceptionable.
Counsel for  the  appellant  next	contended  that	 the
evidence pertaining  to the  recovery of  the rifle  and the
evidence adduced  by the  prosecution in  order to establish
that one  of the rifles used in the course of the occurrence
was issued  to appellant  Machhi Singh in his capacity as an
officer of  the Punjab	Homeguards was	not satisfactory and
reliable.  The	Sessions  Court	 and  the  High	 Court	have
accepted the prosecution evidence in this behalf. We have on
our own	 perused the  evidence	and  we	 see  no  reason  to
disbelieve the	evidence connecting  appellant Machhi  Singh
with the  weapon of offence (Ex. P-18). The evidence of P.W.
15 Shri	 Yashpal, Platoon  Commander of Punjab Homeguard, 