CASE: K.M. Nanavati v State of Maharashtra (1961)
SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1596139/

[Cites
44
, Cited by
284
]
Supreme Court of India
K. M. Nanavati vs State Of Maharashtra on 24 November, 1961
Equivalent citations: 1962 AIR 605, 1962 SCR SUPL. (1) 567, AIR 1962 SUPREME COURT 605, 1962 2 SCJ 347 1964 BOM LR 488, 1964 BOM LR 488
Bench:
S.K. Das
,
Raghubar Dayal
PETITIONER:
K. M. NANAVATI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA

DATE OF JUDGMENT:
24/11/1961

BENCH:
SUBBARAO, K.
BENCH:
SUBBARAO, K.
DAS, S.K.
DAYAL, RAGHUBAR

CITATION:
 1962 AIR  605		  1962 SCR  Supl. (1) 567
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1964 SC1563	 (6)
 F	    1974 SC1570	 (19)
 RF	    1976 SC 966	 (32)
 F	    1983 SC 855	 (16)
 D	    1987 SC 852	 (9)
 R	    1990 SC1459	 (24)


ACT:
     Jury  Trial-Charge-Misdirection-Reference	by
Judge,	if  and	 when  competent-Plea  of  General
Exception-Burden   of	proof-"Grave   an   sudden
provocation"-Test-Power	  of	High   Court	in
reference-
Code of  Criminal  Procedure
(Act,  5	of
1898), 88. 307, 410, 417, 418 (1), 423(2), 297,155
(1), 162-
Indian Penal Code
, 1860 (Act 45 of 1860),
88. 302,  300,
Exception  I-Indian  Evidence  Act,
1872
(1 of 1872), 8. 105.



HEADNOTE:
     Appellant Nanavati,  a Naval Officer, was put
up on  trial under  ss. 302  and 304 Part I of the
Indian Penal  Code
for	the alleged  murder of his
wife's paramour. The prosecution case in substance
was that  on the day of occurrence his wife Sylvia
confessed to  him of  her  illicit  intimacy  with
Ahuja and  the accused went to his ship, took from
its stores  a revolver	and cartridges	on a false
pretext, loaded	 the same,  went to  Ahuja's flat,
entered his  bed  room	and  shot  him	dead.  The
defence, inter	alia, was that as his wife did not
tell him  if Ahuja would marry her and take charge
of their children, he decided to go and settle the
matter with him. He drove his wife and children to
a cinema  where he  dropped them promising to pick
them up	 when the  show ended  at 6 p.m., drove to
the ship  and took the revolver and the cartridges
on a  false pretext  intending to  shoot  himself.
Then he drove
568
his car	 to Ahuja's  office and	 not  finding  him
there, drove  to his  flat. After an altercation a
struggle ensued	 between the  two and in course of
that struggle  two shots went off accidentally and
hit Ahuja.  Evidence, oral  and	 documentary,  was
adduced	 in   the  case	 including  three  letters
written by  Sylvia to  Ahuja.  Evidence	 was  also
given of  an extra-judicial confession made by the
accused to prosecution witness 12 who deposed that
the accused  when leaving  the place of occurrence
told him  that he  had a quarrel with Ahuja as the
latter	had   'connections'  with   his	 wife  and
therefore he killed him. This witness also deposed
that he	 told P. W. 13, Duty Officer at the Police
Station, what  the  accused  had  told	him.  This
statement was  not recorded  by P.  W. 13  and was
denied by  him in  his cross-examination.  In  his
statement to the investigation officer it was also
not recorded.  The jury returned a verdict of 'not
guilty' on both the charges by a majority of 8: 1.
The Sessions Judge disagreed with that verdict, as
in his view, no reasonable body of men could bring
that verdict  on the  evidence	and  referred  the
matter to  the High Court under
s. 307
of the Code
of Criminal  Procedure.	 The  two  Judges  of  the
Division Bench	who heard  the	matter	agreed	in
holding that the appellant was guilty under
s. 302
of the	Indian Penal  Code and	sentenced  him	to
undergo rigorous  imprisonment for  life.  One	of
them held  that there  were misdirections  in  the
Sessions Judge's  charge to  the  jury	and  on	 a
review of the evidence came to the conclusion that
the accused  was guilty	 of murder and the verdict
of the	jury was  perverse. The	 other Judge based
his conclusion	on the	ground that  no reasonable
body of	 persons could come to the conclusion that
jury had  arrived at.  On appeal  to this Court by
special leave  it was  contended on  behalf of the
appellant  that	 under
s.  307
of  the  Code	of
Criminal Procedure  it was  incumbent on  the High
Court to decide the competency of the reference on
a perusal  of the  order of reference itself since
it had no jurisdiction to go into the evidence for
that  purpose,	 that  the   High  Court  was  not
empowered by  s. 307(3)	 of the	 Code to set aside
the verdict  of the  jury on the ground that there
were misdirections  in the charge, that there were
no misdirections in the charge nor was the verdict
perverse and that since there was grave and sudden
provocation the	 offence committed if any, was not
murder but  culpable  homicide	not  amounting	to
murder.
^
     Held,  that   the	connections  were  without
substance and the appeal must fail.
     Judged  by	  its  historical  background  and
properly construed, s. 307 of the
Code of Criminal
Procedure
was  meant to	 confer	 wider	powers	of
interference on the High Court than
569
in an  appeal to  safeguard against  an	 erroneous
verdict of  the jury.  This  special  jurisdiction
conferred on  the High Court by s. 307 of the Code
is  essentially	  different  from   its	 appellate
jurisdiction under ss. 410 and 417 of the code, s.
423(2) conferring  no powers  but only	saving the
limitation under s. 418(1), namely, that an appeal
against an  order of conviction or an acquittal in
a jury trial must be confined to matters of law.
     The words	"for the  ends of  justice" in	s.
307(1) of  the Code, which indicate that the Judge
disagreeing with  the  verdict,	 must  be  of  the
opinion	 that	the  verdict   was  one	 which	no
reasonable  body   of  men   could  reach  on  the
evidence, coupled  with the  words 'clearly of the
opinion' gave  the Judge  a wide and comprehensive
discretion to  suit different  situations.  Where.
therefore, the	Judge disagreed	 with the  verdict
and recorded  the  grounds  of	his  opinion,  the
reference  was	 competent,  irrespective  of  the
question  whether   the	 Judge	was  right  in	so
differing from the jury or forming such an opinion
as to  the verdict.  There is nothing in s. 307(1)
of the	Code that  lends support to the contention
that  though  the  Judge  had  complied	 with  the
necessary conditions, the High Court should reject
the reference  without going  into the evidence if
the reasons  given in  the order  of reference did
not sustain the view expressed by the Judge.
     Section 307(3)  of the Code by empowering the
High Court either to acquit or convict the accused
after considering  the entire evidence, giving due
weight to  the opinions	 of the Sessions Judge and
the jury,  virtually conferred	the functions both
of the jury and the Judge on it.
     Where, therefore,	misdirections vitiated the
verdict of  the jury,  the High	 Court had as much
the power  to  go  into	 the  entire  evidence	in
disregard of  the verdict  of the  jury as  it had
when there  were no  misdirections  and	 interfere
with it	 if it	was such  as no reasonable body of
persons could  have returned  on the  evidence. In
disposing of  the reference,  the High Court could
exercise any of the procedural powers conferred on
it by s. 423 or any other sections of the Code.
     Ramanugarh Singh v. King Emperor, (1946) L.R.
73 I.  A. 174,	Akhlakali Hayatalli  v.	 State	of
Bombay, [1954]	S.C.R. 435,  Ratan Rai v. State of
Bihar, [1957]  S.C.R. 273,  Sashi Mohan Debnath v.
State of  West Bengal  [1958] S.  C. R.	 960,  and
Emperor v.  Ramdhar Kurmi,  A. I. R. 1948 Pat. 79,
referred to.
     A misdirection  is something  which the judge
in his	charge tells the jury and is wrong or in a
wrong manner
570
tending to  mislead  them.  Even  an  omission	to
mention	 matters   which  are	essential  to  the
prosecution or	the defence  case in order to help
the jury  to come to a correct verdict may also in
certain circumstances  amount to  a  misdirection.
But in	either case,  every misdirection  or  non-
direction is not in itself sufficient to set aside
a verdict unless it can be said to have occasioned
a failure of justice.
     Mustak Hussein  v. State  of Bombay [1953] S.
C. R.  809 and	Smt. Nagindra  Bala Mitra v. Sunil
Chandra Roy, [1960] 3 S. C. R. 1, referred to.
     There is  no  conflict  between  the  general
burden that  lies on the prosecution in a criminal
case and the special burden imposed on the accused
under
s.  105
of  the Evidence Act where he pleads
any of	the General  Exceptions mentioned  in  the
Indian Penal Code
. The presumption of innocence in
the favour  of the  accused continues  all through
and the	 burden that  lies on  the prosecution	to
prove his guilt, except where the statute provides
otherwise, never shifts. Even if the accused fails
to prove  the Exception	 the  prosecution  has	to
discharge its own burden and the evidence adduced,
although insufficient  to establish the Exception,
may be	sufficient to  negative one or more of the
ingredients of the offence.
     Woolmington    v.	  Director    of    Public
Prosecutions, L. R. (1935) A. C. 462, considered.
     Attygalle v.  Emperor, A.	I. R.  1936 P.	C.
169, distinguished.
     State  of	Madras	v.  A.	Vaidyanatha  Iyer,
[1958] S.  C. R.  580 and C. S. D. Swamy v. State,
[1960] 1 S. C. R. 461, referred to.
     Consequently, where,  as in the instant case,
the accused relied on the Exception embodied in
s.
80
of the Indian Penal Code and the Sessions Judge
omitted to  point out  to the jury the distinction
between the burden that lay on the prosecution and
that on	 the accused  and explain the implications
of  the	  terms	 'lawful   act',  lawful  manner',
'unlawful  means'   and	 'with	 proper	 care  and
caution' occurring  in that  section and point out
their application  to the  facts of the case these
were  serious	misdirections  that  vitiated  the
verdict of the jury.
     Extra-judicial confession made by the accused
is a  direct piece  of evidence	 and the stringent
rule of approach to circumstantial evidence has no
application to	it. Since in the instant case, the
Sessions Judge	in summarising	the  circumstances
mixed up  the confession  with	the  circumstances
while directing	 the jury  to apply  the  rule	of
circumstantial evidence and
571
it might  well be  that the jury applied that rule
to it,	his  charge  was  vitiated  by	the  grave
misdirection that  must effect that correctness of
the jury's verdict.
     The question  whether the	omission to  place
certain evidence  before the  jury  amounts  to	 a
misdirection has  to be	 decided on  the facts	of
each case.  Under
s.  297
of  the Code of Criminal
Procedure it  is the  duty of  the Sessions  Judge
after the  evidence is	closed and the counsel for
the accused and the prosecution have addressed the
jury, to  sum up  the evidence	from  the  correct
perspective. The  omission of the Judge in instant
case, therefore,  to place  the	 contents  of  the
letters written	 by the wife to her paramour which
in effect  negatived the  case made by the husband
and the	 wife in  their	 deposition  was  a  clear
misdirection. Although	the letters  were read	to
jury by	 the counsel for the parties, that did not
absolve the  judge from	 his  clear  duty  in  the
matter.
     R. V. Roberts, [1942] 1 All. E. R. 187 and R.
v.  Affield,   [1961]  3  All.	E.  R.	243,  held
inapplicable.
     The commencement  of investigation	 under
s.
156 (1)
of the	 Code of  Criminal Procedure  in a
particular case,  which is a question of fact, has
to  be	 decided  on   the  facts   of	the  case,
irrespective of	 any irregularity committed by the
Police Officer	in recording the first information
report under
s. 154
of the Code.
     Where investigation had in fact commenced, as
in the	instant case,  s.  162	of  the	 Code  was
immediately attracted.	But the	 proviso  to  that
section	 did  not  permit  the	eliciting  from	 a
prosecution  witness   in  course  of  his  cross-
examination of	any statement  that he	might have
made  to  the  investigation  officer  where  such
statement was not used to contradict his evidence.
The proviso  also had  no  application	to-a  oral
statement  made	  during  investigation	  and  not
reduced to writing.
     In the  instant case,  therefore, there could
be  no	 doubt	that   the  Sessions  Judge  acted
illegally in admitting the evidence of P. W. 13 to
contradict P. W. 12 in regard to the confession of
the accused  and clearly  misdirected  himself	in
placing the said evidence before the jury.
     Exception 1  to
s.	 300
of	 the Indian  Penal
Code could  have no  application to  the case. The
test of	 "grave and  sudden" provocation under the
Exception must	be  whether  a	reasonable  person
belonging to  the same	class of  society  as  the
accused, placed	 in a  similar situation, would be
so provoked as to lose his self control. In India,
unlike in  England, words  and gestures may, under
certain	 circumstances	 cause	grave  and  sudden
provocation so	as to  attract that Exception. The
mental background  created by  any previous act of
the victim can
572
also  be   taken  into	consideration  in  judging
whether the  subsequent act  could cause grave and
sudden provocation,  but the  fatal blow should be
clearly traced	to the	influence of  the  passion
arising from  that provocation	and not	 after the
passion had  cooled  down  by  lapse  of  time	or
otherwise, giving room and scope for premeditation
and calculation.
     Mancini v.	 Director of  Public Prosecutions,
L.R. (1942)  A.C. I,  Holmes v. Director of Public
Prosecutions, L.  R. (1946) A.C. 588 Duffy's case,
[1949]1 All.  E. R. 932 and R. v. Thomas, (1837) 7
C. & P. 817, considered.
     Empress v.	 Khogayi, (1879)  I. L.	 R. 2 Mad.
122, Boya Munigadu v. The Queen, (1881) I. L. R. 3
Mad. 33,  In re Murugian I. L. R. (1957) Mad. 805,
In re  C. Narayan,  A.I.R.   1958 A.  P. 235,  Jan
Muhammad v.  Emperor, I.  L. R.	 (1929) Lah.  861,
Emperor v. Balku, I. L. R. (1938) All 789 and Babu
Lal v. State A. I. R. 1960 All. 223, referred to.
     Semble:   Whether a  reasonable person in the
	       circumstances of	 a particular case
	       committed the  offence under  grave
	       and   sudden   provocation   is	 a
	       question of  fact for  the jury	to
	       decide.
     Holmes v.	Director of Public Prosecution, L.
R. (1916) A. C. 588, considered.



JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL  APPELLATE   JURISDICTION:  Criminal
Appeal No. 195 of 1960.
Appeal by special leave from the judgment and
order dated  March 11,	1960, of  the Bombay  High
Court in Criminal Jury Reference No. 159 of 1959.
G. S. Pathak, S. G. Patwardhan, Rajini Patel,
Porus A.  Metha, J.  B. Dadachaji, Ravinder Narain
and O. C. Mathur, for the appellant.
M. C. Setalvad, Attorney-General of India, C.
M. Trivedi,  V. H. Gumeshte, B. R. G. K. Achar and
R. H. Dhebar, for the respondent.
1961. November  24. The Judgment of the Court
was delivered by
     SUBBA RAO,	 J.-This appeal	 by special  leave
arises out  of the  judgment of	 the  Bombay  High
Court sentencing  Nanavati, the appellant, to life
imprisonment for  the murder  of  Prem	Bhagwandas
Ahuja, a businessman of Bombay.
573
This appeal  presents the commonplace problem
of an  alleged murder  by an  enraged husband of a
paramour of  his wife: but it aroused considerable
interest in  the public	 mind  by  reason  of  the
publicity   it	  received   and   the	 important
constitutional point  it had  given rise to at the
time of its admission.
The appellant  was charged	 under s.  302	as
well as	 under s. 304, Part I, of the
Indian Penal
Code
and  was tried by the Sessions Judge, Greater
Bombay, with  the aid  of special  jury. The  jury
brought in a verdict of "not guilty" by 8: 1 under
both the  sections; but the Sessions Judge did not
agree with the verdict of the jury, as in his view
the majority  verdict of the jury was such that no
reasonable body of men could, having regard to the
evidence, bring	 in such  a verdict.  The  learned
Sessions Judge	submitted the case under
s. 307
of
the Code  of Criminal Procedure to the Bombay High
Court after recording the grounds for his opinion.
The said  reference was	 heard by a division bench
of the	said High  Court consisting  of Shelat and
Naik, JJ.  The two  learned Judges  gave  separate
judgments, but	agreed in holding that the accused
was guilty  of the  offence of murder under
s. 302
of the	Indian Penal  Code and	sentenced  him	to
undergo rigorous  imprisonment for  life.  Shelat,
J., having  held that  there were misdirections to
the jury, reviewed the entire evidence and came to
the conclusion that the accused was clearly guilty
of  the	  offence  of  murder,	alternatively,	he
expressed the  view that  the verdict  of the jury
was perverse,  unreasonable  and,  in  any  event,
contrary to  the weight	 of  evidence.	Naik,  J.,
preferred  to	base   his   conclusion	  on   the
alternative ground,  namely,  that  no	reasonable
body of	 persons could have come to the conclusion
arrived at  by the  jury. Both	the learned Judges
agreed that  no case  had been	made out to reduce
the offence from murder to culpable
574
homicide not  amounting	 to  murder.  The  present
appeal	has   been  preferred	against	 the  said
conviction and sentence.
The case  of the  prosecution may	be  stated
thus: This  accused, at	 the time  of the  alleged
murder, was  second in command of the Indian Naval
Ship "Mysore".	He married  Sylvia in  1949 in the
registry office	 at Portsmouth, England. They have
three children	by the	marriage, a boy aged 9 1/2
years a girl aged 5 1/2 years and another boy aged
3 years.  Since the  time of  marriage, the couple
were living  at different  places having regard to
the exigencies	of service  of Nanavati.  Finally,
they shifted  to Bombay.  In  the  same	 city  the
deceased Ahuja	was doing  business in automobiles
and was	 residing, along  with his  sister,  in	 a
building called "Shreyas" till 1957 and thereafter
in  another   building	called	 "Jivan	 Jyot"	in
Setalvad Road.	In the year 1956, Agniks, who were
common friends of Nanavatis and Ahujas, introduced
Ahuja and  his	sister	to  Nanavatis.	Ahuja  was
unmarried and  was about  34 years  of age  at the
time of	 his death,  Nanavati, as a Naval Officer,
was frequently going away from Bombay in his ship,
leaving	 his   wife  and   children   in   Bombay.
Gradually, friendship  developed between Ahuja and
Sylvia,	 which	 culminated  in	 illicit  intimacy
between them.  On April 27, 1959, Sylvia confessed
to Nanavati  of her  illicit intimacy  with Ahuja.
Enraged at  the conduct of Ahuja, Nanavati went to
his ship, took from the stores of the ship a semi-
automatic revolver  and six  cartridges on a false
pretext, loaded	 the same,  went to  the  flat	of
Ahuja entered  his bed-room  and  shot	him  dead.
Thereafter, the accused surrendered himself to the
police. He  was put under arrest and in due course
he was	committed to  the Sessions  for	 facing	 a
charge under
s. 302
of the Indian Penal Code.
The defence  version,  as	disclosed  in  the
Statement made	by the accused before the Sessions
Court  under  s.  342  of  the
Code  of  Criminal
Procedure
and
575
his deposition	in the	said Court, may be briefly
stated: The  accused was  away with  his ship from
April 6,  1959, to  April  18,	1959.  Immediately
after returning to Bombay, he and his wife went to
Ahmednagar for	about three days in the company of
his younger brother and his wife. Thereafter, they
returned to  Bombay  and  after	 a  few	 days  his
brother and  his wife  left them.  After they  had
left,  the  accused  noticed  that  his	 wife  was
behaving  strangely  and  was  not  responsive	or
affectionate to	 him. When questioned, she used to
evade the  issue. At  noon on April 27, 1959, when
they were  sitting in  the  sitting-room  for  the
lunch to  be served, the accused put his arm round
his wife  affectionately, when	she seemed  to	go
tense  and  unresponsive.  After  lunch,  when	he
questioned her	about her  fidelity, she shook her
head to	 indicate that	she was unfaithful to him.
He