CASE: Olga Tellis v Bombay Municipal Corporation (1985)
SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/709776/

[Cites
56
, Cited by
1065
]
Supreme Court of India
Olga Tellis & Ors vs Bombay Municipal Corporation & Ors. Etc on 10 July, 1985
Equivalent citations: 1986 AIR 180, 1985 SCR SUPL. (2) 51, AIR 1986 SUPREME COURT 180, 1986 CRILR(SC&MP) 23, 1985 (3) SCC 545, (1985) 2 BOM CR 434
Author:
Y.V.  Chandrachud
Bench:
Y.V.  Chandrachud
,
Syed Murtaza Fazalali
,
V.D. Tulzapurkar
,
O. Chinnappa  Reddy
,
A.  Varadarajan
PETITIONER:
OLGA TELLIS & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
BOMBAY MUNICIPAL CORPORATION & ORS. ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT10/07/1985

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V. ((CJ)
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
TULZAPURKAR, V.D.
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
VARADARAJAN, A. (J)

CITATION:
 1986 AIR  180		  1985 SCR  Supl. (2)  51
 1985 SCC  (3) 545	  1985 SCALE  (2)5
 CITATOR INFO :
 F	    1986 SC 204	 (11)
 RF	    1986 SC 847	 (12)
 D	    1989 SC  38	 (13)
 D	    1989 SC1988	 (8,20,21)
 R	    1990 SC1480	 (41,109)
 F	    1991 SC 101	 (23,32,223,239,258)
 RF	    1991 SC1117	 (5)
 RF	    1991 SC1902	 (24)
 E	    1992 SC 789	 (13)


ACT:
     Constitution of India, 1950 :
Article 32	 -
Fundamental Rights - Estoppel - Principle
behind -  No estoppel  can be claimed against enforcement of
Fundamental Rights.
Article 21
,  19(1)	 (e)
&	 (g)  -	 Pavement  and	slum
dwellers Forcible  eviction and	 removal of  their  hutments
under
Bombay  Municipal Corporation  Act
-  Whether deprives
them of	 their means of livelihood and consequently right to
life -	Right to  life - Meaning of - Whether includes right
to livelihood.
Article 32
& 21  -
Writ  Petition against procedurally
ultra vires Government action - Whether maintainable.
Bombay Municipal  Corporation Act,	 1888
, s.314 - Power
to remove encroachments "without notice , when permissible -
Section - Whether ultra vires the Constitution.
     Administrative Law	 - Natural  Justice -  Audi  alteram
partem -  Notice -  Discretion to act with or without notice
must be	 exercised reasonably,	fairly and  justly - Natural
justice - Exclusion - How far permissible.



HEADNOTE:
     The petitioners  in writ petitions Nos. 4610-12/81 live
on pavements and in slums in the city of Bombay. Some of the
petitioners in	the second batch of writ petitions Nos.5068-
79 of  1981, are  residents of	Kamraj	Nagar,	a  basti  or
habitation which  is alleged  to have come into existence in
about 1960-61,	near the  Western Express  Highway,  Bombay,
while others  are residing in structures constructed off the
Tulsi Pipe  Road, Mahim, Bombay. The Peoples Union for Civil
Liberties, Committee for the Protection of Democratic Rights
and two journalists have also joined in the writ petitions.
52
     Some  time	  in  1981,   the  respondents	-  State  of
Maharashtra and Bombay Municipal Corporation took a decision
that all pavement dwellers and the slum or busti dwellers in
the city  of Bombay will be evicted forcibly and deported to
their respective  places of  origin  or	 removed  to  places
outside the  city of  Bombay. Pursuant to that decision, the
pavement dwellings  of some  of the petitioners were in fact
demolished by  the Bombay Municipal Corporation. Some of the
petitioners  challenged	  the  aforesaid   decision  of	 the
respondents in	the High  Court.  The  petitioners  conceded
before	the  High  Court  that	they  could  not  claim	 any
fundamental right  to put  up huts  on pavements  or  public
roads, and also gave an undertaking to vacate the huts on or
before October,	 15, 1981.  On such undertaking being given,
the respondents	 agreed that the huts will not be demolished
until October 15, 1981 and the writ petition was disposed of
accordingly.
     In	 writ	petitions  filed   under
Article   32
,	 the
petitioners challenged	the decision  of the  respondents to
demolish the pavement dwellings and the slum hutments on the
grounds (i)  that  evicting  a	pavement  dweller  from	 his
habitat amounts to depriving him of his right to livelihood,
which is  comprehended in the right guaranteed by
Article 21
of the	Constitution that no person shall be deprived of his
life except  according to procedure established by law, (ii)
that the  impugned action  of the  State Government  and the
Bombay Municipal  Corporation is violative of the provisions
contained in
Article  19(1)(3)
,  19(1)(g)
and
21
of	 the
Constitution, (iii) that the procedure prescribed by
Section
314
of	the Bombay  Municipal Corporation  Act, 1888 for the
removal of  encroachments from	pavements is  arbitrary	 and
unreasonable since,  not only  does it	not provide  for the
giving of  a notice  before the	 removal of  an encroachment
but, expressly	enables that  the Municipal Commissioner may
cause the  encroachments to be removed without notice , (iv)
that it	 is constitutionally  impermissible to	characterise
the  pavement	dwellers  as  'trespassers',  because  their
occupation of  pavements arises	 from economic	compulsions;
and (v)	 that the  Court must  determine the  content of the
'right to  life', the  function of  property  in  a  welfare
state, the  dimension and true meaning of the constitutional
mandate that  property must  subserve common good, the sweep
of the	right to  reside and  settle  in  any  part  of	 the
territory of  India which is guaranteed by
Article 19(1) (a)
and the	 right to carry on any occupation, trade or business
which is  guaranteed by
Article 19(1)	(g)
,  the  competing
claims of  pavement dwellers  on the  one hand	and  of	 the
pedestrians  on	 the  other  and,  the	larger	question  of
ensuring equality before the law.
53
     The respondents contested the writ petitions contending
that (1) the petitioners must be estopped from contending in
the Supreme  Court that	 the huts constructed by them on the
pavements cannot  be demolished	 because of  their right  to
livelihood, since  they had  conceded in the High Court that
they did  not claim  any fundamental right to put up huts on
pavements or  public roads  and had  given an undertaking to
the High Court that they will not obstruct the demolition of
the huts after October 15, 1981.; (2) that no person has any
legal right  to encroach  upon or to construct any structure
on a foot-path, public street or on any place over which the
public has  a right  of way.  The right conferred by
Article
19(1) (e)
of the  Constitution to  reside and settle in any
part of	 India	cannot	be  read  to  confer  a	 licence  to
encroach and  trespass upon  public property;  (3) that	 the
provisions of
sections 312
,
313
and
314
of	 the  Bombay
Municipal Corporation  Act do  not violate the Constitution,
but are conceived in public interest and great care is taken
by the authorities to ensure that no harassment is caused to
any pavement  dweller by  enforcing the provisions; (4) that
the huts  near the  Western  Express  Highway,	Vile  Parle,
Bombay, were  constructed on  an accessory  road which	is a
part of	 the Highway  itself, and  were never regularised by
the Corporation and no registration numbers were assigned to
them; (5)  that no  deprivation of  life, either directly or
indirectly is  involved in  the eviction  of  the  slum	 and
pavement  dweller   from  public   places.   The   Municipal
Corporation is	under an obligation under
section 314
of the
B.M.C.	Act  to	 remove	 obstruction  on  pavements,  public
streets and  other public  places. The	petitioners have not
only  violated	 the  provisions  of  the
Bombay  Municipal
Corporation Act
,  but they have contravened
sections 111
and
115
of the Bombay Police Act also.
     Disposing of the writ petitions,
^
     HELD: 1.1	The petitions are clearly maintainable under
Article 32
of the  Constitution.  Where  the  action  taken
against a citizen is procedurally ultra vires, the aggrieved
party can move the Supreme Court under
Article 32.
[79 C-D]
     Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar v. State of Maharashtra [1966]
3 S.C.R. 744-770, followed.
     Smt. Ujjam	 Bai v.	 State of  Uttar Pardesh.  [1963]  1
S.C.R. 778, referred to.
54
     1.2 There	can be no estoppel against the Constitution.
The Constitution  is not  only the paramount law of the land
but, it	 is the	 source and  sustenance	 of  all  laws.	 Its
provisions are conceived in public interest and are intended
to serve a public purpose. The doctrine of estoppel is based
on the principle that consistency in word and action imparts
certainty and  honesty to  human affairs.  If a person makes
representation to  another, on the faith of which the latter
acts to	 is prejudice,	the former  cannot resile  from	 the
representation made  by him.  He must  make  it	 good.	This
principle can  have no	application to	representations made
regarding  the	 assertion  or	enforcement  of	 fundamental
rights. [77 C-E]
     1.3 Fundamental rights are undoubtedly conferred by the
Constitution upon  individuals which have to be asserted and
en forced  by them,  if those  rights are violated. But, the
high purpose  which the	 Constitution seeks  to	 achieve  by
conferment of  fundamental rights  is not  only	 to  benefit
individuals but	 to  secure  the  larger  interests  of	 the
community. The Preamable of the Constitution says that India
is a  democratic Republic.  It is  in order  to	 fulfil	 the
promise	 of   the  Preamble   that  fundamental	 rights	 are
conferred by  the Constitution,	 some on citizens like those
guaranteed by
Articles 15
,  16
, 19
,  21
and
29
and, some on
citizens and  non-citizens alike,  like those  guaranteed by
Articles  14
,	21
,  22
and
25
of  the  Constitution.  No
individual can	barter away  the freedoms conferred upon him
by  the	  Constitution.	 A  concession	made  by  him  in  a
proceedings, whether  under a  mis take of law or otherwise,
that he	 does not possess or will not enforce any particular
fundamental right,  cannot create an estoppel against him in
that or	 any subsequent	 proceedings. Such  a concession, if
enforced, would	 defeat the purpose of the Constitution. [77
F-H, 78 A-B]
     The plea of estoppel is closely connected with the plea
of waiver,  the object of both being to ensure bona fides in
day-to day transactions. [78 D]
     In the  instant case, notwithstanding the fact that the
petitioners had	 conceded in the Bombay High Court that they
have no fundamental right to construct hutments on pavements
and that  they will  not object	 to their  demolition  after
October 15,  1981, they are entitled to assert that any such
action	on  the	 part  of  public  authorities	will  be  in
violation of  their fundamental rights. How far the argument
regarding the existence and scope    of the right claimed by
the petitioners is well-founded is
55
another matter- But, the argument has to be examined despite
the concession. [78 C-D]
     Basheshar Nath  v. The Commissioner of Income Tax Delhi
(1959) Supp. 1 S.C.R. 528, referred to.
     2.1 The sweep of the right to life conferred by
Article
21
is  wide and	 far reaching.	It does not mean merely that
life cannot  be extinguished  or taken away as, for example,
by the	imposition and	execution  of  the  death  sentence,
except according  to procedure	established by	law. That is
but one	 aspect of  the right  to life. An equally important
facet of  that right  is the right to livelihood because, no
person can  live without  the means  of living, that is, the
means of  livelihood. If  the right  to	 livelihood  is	 not
treated as  a part  of the constitutional right to live, the
easiest way of depriving a person of his right to life would
be to deprive him of his means of livelihood to the point of
abrogation. Such  deprivation would not only denude the life
of its	effective content  and meaningfulness  but it  would
make life  impossible to  live. And  yet,  such	 deprivation
would not  have to  be	in  accordance	with  the  procedure
established by	law, if	 the  right  to	 livelihood  is	 not
regarded as  a part  of the right to life. That, which alone
makes it  possible to  live, leave  aside  what	 makes	like
livable, must  be deemed  to be an integral component of the
right to life. [79 F-H, 80 A-B]
     2.2 The  principles contained  in
Articles 39(a)
and
41
must be regarded as equally fundamental in the understanding
and interpretation of the meaning and content of fundamental
rights. If  there is  an obligation upon the State to secure
to the	citizens an  adequate means  of livelihood  and	 the
right to  work, it  would be  sheer pedantry  to exclude the
right to  livelihood from  the content of the right to life.
The State  may not, by affirmative action, be compellable to
provide	 adequate   means  of  livelihood  or  work  to	 the
citizens. But,	any person  who is  deprived of his right to
livelihood except  according  to  just	and  fair  procedure
established  by	  law,	can  challenge	the  deprivation  as
offending the  right to life conferred by
Article 21.
[80 G-
H, 81 A]
     Munn v.  Illinois [1877]  94 US 113 and Kharak Singh v.
The State of U.P. [1964] 1 S.C.R. 332 referred to.
     In Re: Sant Ram (1960) 3 S.C.R. 499, distinguished.
56
     2.3 In  a matter  like the	 one in	 which the future of
half of	 the city's  population is  at stake, the Court must
consult	 authentic  empirical  data  compiled  by  agencies,
official and  non-official. It	is by  that process that the
core of	 the problem  can  be  reached	and  a	satisfactory
solution found.	 It would  be unrealistic on the part of the
Court to  reject  the  petitions  on  the  ground  that	 the
petitioners have not adduced evidence to show that they will
be rendered  jobless if	 they are evicted from the slums and
pavements. Common  sense,  which  is  a	 cluster  of  life's
experiences, is	 often more  dependable than the rival facts
presented by warring litigants. [82 B-C]
     In the  instant case,  it is  clear  from	the  various
expert studies that one of the main reasons of the emergence
and  growth  of	 squatter-settlements  in  big	Metropolitan
cities like Bombay, is the availability of job opportunities
which are  lacking in  the rural sector. The undisputed fact
that even after eviction, the squatters return to the cities
affords proof  of  that	 position.  These  facts  constitute
empirical evidence to justify the conclusion that persons in
the position  of petitioners  live in slums and on pavements
because they  have small jobs to nurse in the city and there
is nowhere  else to  live. Evidently, they choose a pavement
or a  slum in  the vicinity of their place of work, the time
otherwise taken	 in commuting  and its cost being forbidding
for their slender means. To lose the pavement or the slum is
to lose	 the job. The conclusion, therefore, in terms of the
constitutional phraseology  is	that  the  eviction  of	 the
petitioners will lead to deprivation of their livelihood and
consequently to the deprivation of life. [82 D, 83 B-D]
     3.1 The  Constitution does	 not put an absolute embargo
on the	deprivation of	life or	 personal liberty. It is far
too well settled to admit of any argument that the procedure
prescribed by law for the deprivation of the right conferred
by
Article  21
must  be fair, just and reasonable. Just as a
mala fide  act has  no existence in the eye of law, even so,
unreasonableness vitiates  law and  procedure alike.  It  is
therefore essential that the procedure prescribed by law for
depriving a person of his fundamental right, must conform to
the means  of justice  and fair	 play. Procedure,  which  is
unjust or  unfair in  the circumstances	 of a case, attracts
the vice  of unreasonableness,	thereby	 vitiating  the	 law
which prescribes that procedure and consequently, the action
taken under it. Any action taken by a public authority which
is invested  with statutory  powers has,  therefore,  to  be
tested by  the application of two standards: The action must
be
57
within the  scope of  the authority  conferred	by  law	 and
secondly, it  must be  reasonable. If any action, within the
scope of  the authority	 conferred by  law, is	found to  be
unreasonable, it must mean that the procedure established by
law under which that action is taken is itself unreasonable.
The substance  of  the	law  cannot  be	 divorced  from	 the
procedure which	 it prescribes	for, how  reasonable the law
is, depends upon how fair is the procedure prescribed by it.
[83 E, 85 F-H, 86 A]
     3.2 In order to decide whether the procedure prescribed
by
section  314
is fair and reasonable, the Court must first
determine the  true meaning  of that  section  because,	 the
meaning of  the law  determines its  legality. Considered in
its proper  perspective,
section  314
is in the nature of an
enabling provision  and not  of a  compulsive character.  It
enables the  Commissioner in  appropriate cases, to dispense
with previous  notice  to  persons  who	 are  likely  to  be
affected by  the proposed  action. It  does not require and,
cannot be  read to  mean that,	in total  disregard  of	 the
relevant circumstances	pertaining to a given situation, the
Commissioner must  cause  the  removal	of  an	encroachment
without	 issuing   previous  notice.  The  primary  rule  of
construction is	 that the  language of	the law must receive
its plain  and natural meaning. What
section 314
provides is
that  the   Commissioner  may,	 without  notice,  cause  an
encroachment to	 be removed.  It does  not command  that the
Commissioner, shall without notice, cause an encroachment to
be removed.  Putting it	 differently,
section 314
confers on
the Commissioner  the discretion to cause an encroachment to
be removed with or without notice. That discretion has to be
exercised in  a reasonable  manner so  as to comply with the
constitutional mandate	that the  procedure accompanying the
performance of a public act must be fair and reasonable. The
Court must  leen in favour of this interpretation because it
helps sustain  the validity  of the law. Reading
section 314
as containing  a command not to the issue before the removal
of an encroachment will make the law invalid. [88 H, 89 A-D]
     3.3
Section  314
is  so  designed	as  to	exclude	 the
principles of natural justice by way of exception and not as
a general  rule.  There	 are  situations  which	 demand	 the
exclusion of  the rules	 of natural  justice  by  reason  of
diverse factors like time, place, the apprehended danger and
so on.	The ordinary  rule which  regulates all procedure is
that persons  who are  likely to be affected by the proposed
action must  be afforded an opportunity of being heard as to
why that  action should	 not be	 taken. The  hearing may  be
given individually or collectively, depending upon the facts
58
of each situation. A departure from this fundamental rule of
natural justice may be presumed to have been intended by the
Legislature only  in circumstances  which warrant  it.	Such
circumstances must  be known to exist, when so required, the
burden being upon those who affirm their existence. [89 E-G]
     3.4 The  proposition that notice need not be given of a
pro posed action because, there can possibly be no answer to
it, is	contrary to the well-recognized understanding of the
real  import  of  the  rule  of	 hearing.  That	 proposition
overlooks that	justice must  not  only	 be  done  but	must
manifestly be  seen to	be done	 and confuses  one  for	 the
other. The appearance of injustice is the denial of justice.
It is  the dialogue with the person likely to be affected by
the proposed action which meets the requirement that justice
must also  be seen  to be  done. Procedural  safeguards have
their historical  origins in  the notion  that conditions of
personal freedom  can be  preserved only  when there is some
institutional check  on arbitrary  action on the part of the
public authorities.  The right	to be  heard has two facets,
intrinsic and  instrumental. The  intrinsic  value  of	that
right  consists	  in  the  opportunity	which  it  gives  to
individuals or groups, against whom decision taken by public
authorities operate,  to participate  in  the  proce