CASE: State of Andhra Pradesh v Rayavarapu Punnayya (1976)
SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/605891/

[Cites
13
, Cited by
373
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Andhra Pradesh vs Rayavarapu Punnayya & Another on 15 September, 1976
Equivalent citations: 1977 AIR 45, 1977 SCR (1) 601, AIR 1977 SUPREME COURT 45, (1976) 4 SCC 382, 1977 SC CRI R 19, (1977) 1 SCR 601, 1976 SCC (CRI) 659, (1976) 2 SCWR 297, 1976 CRI APP R (SC) 320
Author:
Ranjit Singh Sarkaria
Bench:
Ranjit Singh Sarkaria
,
Syed Murtaza Fazalali
PETITIONER:
STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
RAYAVARAPU PUNNAYYA & ANOTHER

DATE OF JUDGMENT15/09/1976

BENCH:
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
BENCH:
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA

CITATION:
 1977 AIR   45		  1977 SCR  (1) 601
 1976 SCC  (4) 382
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1979 SC  80	 (4,5)
 R	    1979 SC1006	 (5)


ACT:
	    Penal  Code	 Ss.  299  and	300--Culpable  homicide	 not
	amounting  to  murder and Murder--Distinction--Tests  to  be
	applied in each case--s. 300,  Thirdly
I.P.C
.--Scope of



HEADNOTE:
	    In the scheme of the Penal Code, 'culpable homicide'  is
	genus  and 'murder' its specie.	 All 'murder'  is  'culpable
	homicide' but not vice-versa.  Speaking generally, 'culpable
	homicide'  sans	 'special  characteristics  of	murder',  is
	'culpable homicide not amounting to murder'. For the purpose
	of  fixing punishment, proportionate to the gravity of	this
	generic	 offence,  the	Code  practically  recognises  three
	degrees	 of  culpable homicide. The first is,  what  may  be
	called,	 culpable homicide of the first degree.	 This is the
	gravest	 form of culpable homicide, which is defined  in  s.
	300  as	 'murder'.  The second may be  termed  as  'culpable
	homicide  of the second degree'.  This is  punishable  under
	the 1st part of
s. 304
. Then there is 'culpable homicide  of
	the  third  degree'.  This is the lowest  type	of  culpable
	homicide  and the punishment provided for it is,  also,	 the
	lowest among the punishments provided for the three  grades.
	Culpable  homicide  of this degree is punishable  under	 the
	second Part of
s. 304
.	[606B-D]
	    Clause  (b) of
s. 299
corresponds with cll. (2) and	 (3)
	of  s.	 300.  The distinguishing feature of  the  mens	 rea
	requisite under clause (2) is the knowledge possessed by the
	offender  regarding  the particular victim being in  such  a
	peculiar  condition or state of health that the	 intentional
	harm  caused to him is likely to be  fatal,  notwithstanding
	the  fact  that such harm would not in the ordinary  way  of
	nature	be sufficient to cause death of a person  in  normal
	health or condition.  The 'intention to cause death' is	 not
	an essential requirement of clause (2).	 Only the  intention
	of  causing  the bodily injury coupled with  the  offender's
	knowledge of the likelihood of such injury causing the death
	of the particular victim, is sufficient to bring the killing
	within the ambit of this clause This aspect of clause (2) is
	borne out by illustration (b) appended to
s. 300
.
	[607C-D]
	    Instances  of cases failing under clause (2) of  s.	 300
	can  be	 where the assailant causes death by  a	 first	blow
	intentionally given  knowing  that  the victim is  suffering
	from an enlarged liver, or enlarged spleen or diseased heart
	and  such blow is likely to cause death of  that  particular
	person as a result of the rupture of the liver, or spleen or
	the  failure of the heart, as the case may be.	If  the	 as-
	sailant	 had no such knowledge about the disease or  special
	frailty	 of the victim, nor an intention to cause  death  or
	bodily injury sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to
	cause  death,  the offence will not be murder, even  if	 the
	injury	which  caused the death,  was  intentionally  given.
	Clause	(b) of
s. 299
does not postulate any such  knowledge
	on the part of the offender.  [607E-F]
	In  Clause  (3) of
s. 300
, instead of the words	 'likely  to
	cause  death' occurring in the corresponding clause  (b)  of
	s.  299,   the	  words	 "sufficient in the ordinary  course
	of  nature"	have		 been	used.  The  distinc-
	tion   between	 a   bodily   injury   likely	 to    cause
	death	and    a  bodily  injury sufficient in the  ordinary
	course	 of   nature  to  cause death,	is  fine  but  real,
	and,  if overlooked, may result in miscarriage	of  justice.
	The difference is one of the degree of probability of  death
	resulting  from	 the  intended	bodily	injury.	   The	word
	"likely" in
s. 299(b)
conveys  the  sense  of of  'probable'
	as  distinguished from a mere possibility. The words  bodily
	injury	......	sufficient in the ordinary course of  nature
	to  cause death' mean  that death will be the 'most   proba-
	ble'  result of the injury,  having regard to  the  ordinary
	course of nature.  [607G-H]
	602
	    For cases to fail within clause (3), it is not necessary
	that the offender intended to cause death, so long as  death
	ensues from the intentional bodily injury or injuries suffi-
	cient	to   cause   death  in	the   ordinary	 course	  of
	nature.	 [608B]
	    Clause  (c)-of  s.	299 and clause (4) of  s.  300	both
	require	 knowledge  of the probability of  the	act  causing
	death.	 Clause (4) of
s. 300
would be applicable where	 the
	knowledge of the offender as to the probability of death  of
	a  person  or persons in general--as  distinguished  from  a
	particular  person or persons--being caused from  his  immi-
	nently dangerous act, approximates to a practical certainty.
	Such knowledge on the part of the offender must	  be of	 the
	highest	  degree   of	probability,  the  act	having	been
	committed  by the offender without any excuse for  incurring
	the  risk  of  causing death or such  injury  as  aforesaid.
	[608F-G]
	    Whenever a court is confronted with the question whether
	the offence is 'murder' or 'culpable homicide not  amounting
	to  murder', on the facts of a case, it will  be  convenient
	for it to approach the problem in three stages. The question
	to  be considered at the first stage would be,	whether	 the
	accused	 has  done an act by doing which he has	 caused	 the
	death  of another.  Proof of such casual connection  between
	the  act of the accused and the death, leads to the,  second
	stage  for,  considering  whether that act  of	the  accused
	amounts	 to culpable homicide as defined in
s. 299
.  If	 the
	answer to this. question is prima facie found in the affirm-
	ative,	the stage for considering the operation of  s.	300,
	Penal  Code,  is reached.  This is the stage  at  which	 the
	Court  should  determine  whether the facts  proved  by	 the
	prosecution  bring the case within the ambit of any  of	 the
	four clauses of	 the  definition  of 'murder' containd in
s.
	300
.  If the answer to this question is in the negative	 the
	offence	 would be 'culpable homicide not amounting  to	mur-
	der',  punishable under the first or the second part  of  s.
	304,  depending, respectively, on whether the second or	 the
	third clause of
s. 299
is applicable.	If this question  is
	found in the positive, but the case comes within any of	 the
	Exceptions enumerated in
s. 300
, the offence would still  be
	'culpable homicide not mounting to murder', punishable under
	the  First Part of
s. 304
,  Penal Code.	     [608H; 609A-C]
	    Rajwant  and anr. v. State of Kerala AIR 1966  SC  1874,
	Virsa	Singh	v. The State of Punjab [1958] SCR  1495	 and
	Andhra v. State of Rajasthan AIR 1966 S.C. 148 followed.
	    In	the  instant case the prosecution  alleged  that  in
	furtherance  of political feuds of the village	the  accused
	followed  the deceased in the bus when he went to  a  neigh-
	bouring	 place,	 chased	 him when he got off  the  bus,	 and
	indiscriminately pounded the legs and arms of the  deceased,
	who  was  55  years old, with heavy  sticks.   The  deceased
	succumbed to his injuries on the following morning.
	    The trial court held that the case was covered by clause
	'thirdly'  of
s. 300
and convicted them under
s. 302
and  s.
	302  read with
s. 34
.
Indian  Penal Code
.  In	appeal,	 the
	High  Court altered the conviction to one under
s. 304
Part
	II;  on' the grounds that (i) there was no premeditation  in
	the attack; (ii) injuries were not on any vital part of	 the
	body;  (iii)  there was no compound  fracture  resulting  in
	heavy haemorrhage; (iv) death occurred due to shock and	 not
	due to haemorrhage and (v) though the accused had  knowledge
	while  inflicting  injuries that they were likely  to  cause
	death, they might no( have had the knowledge that they	were
	so imminently dangerous that in' all probability their	acts
	would'	result	in such injuries as are likely to  came	 the
	death.
	    In	appeal to this Court the  appellant-State  contended
	that the case fell under
s. 300(3)
I.P.C., while the accused
	sought to support the judgment' of the High Court.
	603
	Allowing the appeal.
	    HELD:  (1) It is not correct to say that the attack	 was
	not premeditated or preplanned.	 The High Court itself found
	that  the  injuries  were   caused  in	furtherance  of	 the
	common	intention  of the respondents,	and  that  therefore
section 34
was applicable.  [611B]
	    (2)	 The  High Court may be right in  its  finding	that
	since the injuries were not on vital parts, the accused	 had
	no intention to cause death but that finding--assuming it to
	be  correct--does not necessarily take the case out  of	 the
	definition  of 'murder'.  The crux of the matter is  whether
	the facts established bring the case within clause 'thirdly'
	of  s. 300.  This question further narrows down into a	con-
	sideration  of	the two-fold issue; (i) whether	 the  bodily
	injuries found on the deceased were intentionally  inflicted
	by  the	 accused ? and (ii) If so, were they  sufficient  to
	cause  death  in the ordinary course of nature	?   If	both
	these  elements are satisfactorily established, the  offence
	will be 'murder', irrespective of the fact whether an reten-
	tion  on the part of the accused  to  cause  death,  had  or
	had  not  been proved.	[612 C-E]
	    In the instant case, the formidable weapons used by	 the
	accused	 in the beating the savage manner of its  execution,
	the  helpless state of the unarmed victim, the intensity  of
	the  violence  caused, the callous conduct  of	the  accused
	in  persisting	in the assault even against the	 protest  of
	feeling	 by  standersall, viewed against the  background  of
	previous animosity between the parties, irresistibly lead to
	the  conclusion that the injuries caused by the	 accused  to
	the  deceased  were intentionally inflicted,  and  were	 not
	accidental.   Thus  the	 presence of the  first	 element  of
	clause 'thirdly' of
s. 300
had been cogently and convincing-
	ly established.	 [613 B-C]
	    (3) The medical evidence shows that there were  compound
	fractures  and	that there was heavy  haemorrhage  requiring
	blood transfusion.  Such injuries are ordinarily  dangerous.
	[613D]
	    (4)	 The medical evidence clearly establishes  that	 the
	cause  of  death was shock and haemorrhage due	to  multiple
	injuries  which were cumulatively sufficient to cause  death
	in the ordinary course of nature.  [612B-C]
	    (5)	 The mere fact that the beating was designedly	con-
	fined by the assailants to the legs and arms or that none of
	the multiple injuries inflicted was individually  sufficient
	in  the ordinary course of nature to cause death,  will	 not
	exclude the application of clause 'thirdly' of
s. 300
.	 The
	expression 'bodily injury' in clause 'thirdly' includes also
	its plural, so that the clause would cover a case where	 all
	the injuries intentionally caused by the accused are cumula-
	tively sufficient to cause the death in the ordinary  course
	of  nature.  even if none of  those  injuries	individually
	measures  upto	such  sufficiency. The sufficiency spoken of
	in  this  clause, is the high probability of  death  in	 the
	ordinary  course of nature, and if such	 sufficiency  exists
	and death is caused and the injury causing it is  intention-
	al,  the case would fail under clause 'thirdly' of  s.	300.
	All  the  conditions which are a pre-requisite for  the	 ap-
	plicability  of	 this clause have been established  and	 the
	offence	 committed by accused in the instant case was  'mur-
	der'.  [614G-H]
	    There is no escape from the conclusion that the  offence
	committed by the accused was murder notwithstanding the fact
	that  the  intention of the accused to cause death  has	 not
	been shown beyond doubt.  [613F]



JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL  APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
	214 of 1971.
(Appeal by Special Leave from the judgment and	Order  dated
	27-7.  1970  of the Andhra Pradesh High. Court	in  Criminal
	Appeals Nos. 26 and 27/69).
7 --1234SCI/76
604
P. Parmeswara Rao and G. Narayana Rao for the Appellant.
	A. Subba Rao for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	SARKARIA,  .1.	 This appeal by special	 leave	is  directed
	against a judgment of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh.	  It
	arises out of these facts.
In Rompicherla village, there were factions    belonging  to
	three major communities viz., Reddys, Kammas and  Bhatrajus.
	Rayavarapu (Respondent No. 1 herein) was the leader of Kamma
	faction,  while Chopparapu Subbareddi was the leader of	 the
	Reddys.	  In politics, the Reddys were supporting  the	Con-
	gress  Party,  while  Kammas were  supporters  of  Swatantra
	Party.	There was bad blood between the two factions  which.
	were  proceeded	 against  under
s. 107
,	 Cr.  P.C.   In	 the
	Panchyat  elections of 1954, a clash took place between	 the
	two  parties.  A member of the Kamma faction  was  murdered.
	Consequently,  nine persons belonging to the  Reddy  faction
	were prosecuted for that murder.  Other incidents also' took
	place  in  which these warring factions were  involved.	  So
	much  so,  a punitive police force was	stationed   in	this
	village to keep the peace during the period from March	1966
	to September 1967.  Sarikonda Kotamraju, the deceased person
	in the instant case, was the leader of Bhatrajus.  In  order
	to  devise  protective measures against	 the  onslaughts  of
	their  opponents, the Bhatrajus held a meeting at the  house
	of the deceased, wherein they resolved to defend  themselves
	against the aggressive actions of the respondents and  their
	party-men.  PW 1, a member of Bhatrajus faction has a cattle
	shed.	The passage to this cattle-shed was blocked  by	 the
	other party. The deceased took PW 1 to Police Station Nekar-
	ikal  and got a report lodged there.  On July 22, 1968,	 the
	Sub-Inspector  of Police  came to the village and  inspected
	the disputed wail in the presence of the parties.  The	Sub-
	Inspector  went away directing both the parties to  come  to
	the  Police Station on the following morning so that a	com-
	promise might be effected.
Another case arising out of a report made to the  police
	by  one Kallam Kotireddi against Accused 2 and 3 and another
	in  respect  of offences under
ss. 324
,
323
and
325
,  Penal
	Code was pending before a Magistrate at Narasaraopet and the
	next date for hearing fixed in that case was July 23, 1968.
	    On the morning of July 23, 1968, at about 6-30 a.m., PWs
	1, 2 and the deceased boarded Bus No. AP 22607 at Rompicher-
	la   for going to Nekarikal.  Some minutes later, Accused  1
	to 5 (hereinafter referred to as A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5) also
	got into the same bus. The accused had obtained tickets	 for
	proceeding  to	Narasaraopet. When the bus stopped at Nekar-
	ikal  Cross Roads, at about 7-30 a.m., the deceased and	 his
	companions alighted for going  to  the	Police Station.	 The
	five  accused  also got down.  The deceased and	 PW  1	went
	towards	 a  Choultry  run by PW 4, While PW 2  went  to	 the
	roadside  to  ease  himself.  A1 and  A2  went	towards	 the
	Coffee	 Hotel situate near the Choultry.  From there,	they
	picked up heavy sticks and went after the deceased into	 the
	Choultry.   On seeing the accused. P W 1 ran away towards  a
	hut nearby.  The deceased stood up.
605
He was an old man of 55 years.	 He was not allowed to	run.
	Despite	 the  entreaties made by the  deceased	with  folded
	hands,	A-1  and A-2 indiscriminately pounded the  legs	 and
	arms  of  the  deceased. One of the by-standers, PW 6, asked
	the  assailants	 as to why they were mercilessly  beating  a
	human being, as if he were a buffalo.  The assailants angri-
	ly retorted that the witness was nobody to question them and
	continued    the   beating   till   the	  deceased    became
	unconscious.The accused then threw their sticks at the spot,
	boarded another vehicle, and went away.	 The. occurrence was
	witnessed by PWs 1 to 7.  The victim was removed by PW 8  to
	Narasaraopet  Hospital in a temporar.  There, at about	8.45
	a.m.,  Doctor Konda Reddy examined him	  and found  19	 in-
	juries, out of which, no less than 9 were (internally) found
	to be grievous.	 They were:
1. Dislocation of distal end of proximal	   phalanx
		   of left  middle finger.
2. Fracture of right radius in its middle.
3. Dislocation of lower end of right ulna.
4. Fracture of lower end of right femur.
5. Fracture of medial malleolus of right tibia.
6. Fracture. of lower 1/3 of right fibula.
7. Dislocation of lower end of left ulna.
8. Fracture of upper end of left tibia.
9. Fracture of right patella.
Finding  the  condition of the injured   serious,	 the
	Doctor	 sent  information to the  Judicial  Magistrate	 for
	getting his dying declaration -recorded.  On Dr. K.  Reddy's
	advice,	 the deceased was immediately removed to the  Guntur
	Hospital where he was examined and given medical aid by	 Dr.
	Sastri.	  His dying declaration, Ex. P-5, was also  recorded
	there  by a Magistrate (PW 10) at about 8.05 p.m.   The	 de-
	ceased,	 however,  succumbed to his injuries at	 about	4.40
	a.m. on July 24, 1968, despite medical aid.
	    The autopsy was conducted by Dr. P.S. Sarojini  (PW	 12)
	in  whose opinion, the injuries found on the  deceased	were
	cummulatively  sufficient  to cause death  in  the  ordinary
	course	of  nature.  The cause of death,  according  to	 the
	Doctor,	 was shock and haemorrhage resulting  from  multiple
	injuries.
The	 trial Judge convicted A-1 and A-2 under
s.  302
as
	well   as under
s. 302
read with
s. 34
, Penal Code and	sen-
	tenced each of them to imprisonment for life.
On  appeal  by the convicts, the	High  Court  altered
	their  conviction to  one under
s. 304
, Pt. II,	 Penal	Code
	and reduced their sentence to 'five years rigorous imprison-
	ment, each.
Aggrieved  by the judgment of the High Court, the  State
	has  come  in appeal to this Court after  obtaining  special
	leave.
A-1, Rayavarappu Punnayya (Respondent 1) has, as reported by
	his Counsel, died during the pendency of this appeal.	This
	information is not contradicted by the Counsel appearing for
	the State.  This
606
appeal	therefore,  in so far as it relates to	A-,  abates.
	The   appeal' against A-2 (Respondent 2), however,  survives
	for decision.
'The  principal question that falls to be considered  in
	this  appeal is, whether the offence disclosed by the  facts
	and circumstances established by the prosecution against the
	respondent, is 'murder' or 'culpable homicide not  amounting
	to murder'.
In the scheme of the Penal Code, 'culpable homicide'  is
	genus  and 'murder' its specie.	 All 'murder'  is  'culpable
	homicide' but not viceversa.  Speaking generally,  'culpable
	homicide'  sans	 'special  characteristics  of	murder',  is
	'culpable  homicide not amounting to. murder'. For the	pur-
	pose  of fixing punishment, proportionate to the gravity  of
	this generic offence, the Code practically recognises  three
	degress	 of  culpable homicide. The first is,  what  may  be
	called,	 culpable homicide of the first degree. This is	 the
	gravest form of culpable homicide which is defined in
s. 300
as 'murder'.  The second may be termed as 'culpable homicide
	of  the second degree'.	 This is punishabl