CASE: K.S. Puttaswamy v Union of India — Privacy (2017)
SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/91938676/

[Cites
294
, Cited by
384
]
Supreme Court of India
Justice K.S.Puttaswamy(Retd) And Anr. vs Union Of India And Ors. on 24 August, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 SUPREME COURT 4161, (2017) 6 BOM CR 78, AIR 2017 SC (CIV) 2714, (2017) 3 KER LJ 17, 2017 (10) SCC 1, (2017) 124 ALL LR 877, (2017) 10 SCALE 1, (2017) 4 CURCC 87, (2017) 6 MAD LJ 267, (2017) 5 ALLMR 686 (SC), (2018) 1 RECCIVR 398, 2017 (178) AIC (SOC) 1 (SC), 242 (2017) DLT 9 (CN)(SC), 2017 (3) KCCR SN 255 (SC), 2017 (4) KLT SN 1 (KER)
Author:
D Y Chandrachud
Bench:
S Abdul Nazeer
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
D Y Chandrachud
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
,
Rohinton Fali Nariman
,
R K Agrawal
,
S A Bobde
,
J Chelameswar
,
Jagdish Singh Khehar
REPORTABLE




                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                            CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO 494 OF 2012



         JUSTICE K S PUTTASWAMY (RETD.),
         AND ANR.                                                ..Petitioners

                                        VERSUS


         UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.                                 ..Respondents
         WITH

         T.C. (CIVIL) NO 151 OF 2013

         T.C. (CIVIL) NO 152 OF 2013

         W.P.(CIVIL) NO 833 OF 2013

         W.P.(CIVIL) NO 829 OF 2013

         W.P.(CIVIL) NO 932 OF 2013

         CONMT. PET. (CIVIL) NO 144 OF 2014 IN W.P.(C) NO. 494/2012

         T.P.(CIVIL) NO 313 OF 2014

         T.P.(CIVIL) NO 312 OF 2014

         S.L.P(CRL.) NO.2524/2014

         W.P.(CIVIL) NO.37/2015
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
PARVEEN KUMAR
Date: 2017.08.24
         W.P.(CIVIL) NO.220/2015
12:36:27 IST
Reason:




                                            1
CONMT. PET. (C)NO.674/2015 IN W.P.(C) NO.829/2013

T.P.(CIVIL)NO.921/2015

CONMT.PET.(C)NO.470/2015 IN W.P.(C) NO.494/2012

CONMT.PET.(C)NO.444/2016 IN W.P.(C) NO.494/2012

CONMT.PET.(C)NO.608/2016 IN W.P.(C) NO.494/2012

W.P.(CIVIL) NO.797/2016

CONMT.PET.(C)NO.844/2017 IN W.P.(C) NO.494/2012

W.P. (C) NO. 342/ 2017

AND WITH W.P.(C) NO.000372/2017



                                  JUDGMENT
Dr D Y CHANDRACHUD, J

This judgment has been divided into sections to facilitate analysis. They are :
A     The reference
B     Decision in M P Sharma
C     Decision in Kharak Singh
D     Gopalan doctrine: fundamental rights as isolated silos
E     Cooper and Maneka: Interrelationship between rights
F     Origins of privacy
G     Natural and inalienable rights
H     Evolution of the privacy doctrine in India
I     The Indian Constitution

          •   Preamble
          •   Jurisprudence on dignity
2
•   Fundamental Rights cases
            •   No waiver of Fundamental Rights
            •   Privacy as intrinsic to freedom and liberty
            •   Discordant Notes    :       (i)        ADM Jabalpur
                                            (ii)       Suresh Koushal

J   India’s commitments under International law
K   Comparative law on privacy
    (i)         UK decisions
    (ii)        US Supreme Court decisions
    (iii)       Constitutional right to privacy in South Africa
    (iv)        Constitutional right to privacy in Canada
    (v)         Privacy under the European Convention on Human Rights and
                the European Charter
    (vi)        Decisions of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights


L   Criticisms of the privacy doctrine
    a           Thomson’s Reductionism
    b           Posner’s Economic critique
    c           Bork’s critique
    d           Feminist critique
M   Constituent Assembly and privacy: limits of originalist interpretation
N   Is the statutory protection to privacy reason to deny a constitutional right?
O   Not an elitist construct
P   Not just a common law right
Q   Substantive Due Process
R   Essential nature of privacy
S   Informational privacy
T   Conclusions
3
PART A


A      The reference

1      Nine judges of this Court assembled to determine whether privacy is a

constitutionally protected value. The issue reaches out to the foundation of a

constitutional culture based on the protection of human rights and enables this Court

to revisit the basic principles on which our Constitution has been founded and their

consequences for a way of life it seeks to protect. This case presents challenges for

constitutional interpretation. If privacy is to be construed as a protected constitutional

value, it would redefine in significant ways our concepts of liberty and the entitlements

that flow out of its protection.
2      Privacy, in its simplest sense, allows each human being to be left alone in a

core which is inviolable. Yet the autonomy of the individual is conditioned by her

relationships with the rest of society. Those relationships may and do often pose

questions to autonomy and free choice. The overarching presence of state and non-

state entities regulates aspects of social existence which bear upon the freedom of

the individual. The preservation of constitutional liberty is, so to speak, work in

progress. Challenges have to be addressed to existing problems. Equally, new

challenges have to be dealt with in terms of a constitutional understanding of where

liberty places an individual in the context of a social order. The emergence of new

challenges is exemplified by this case, where the debate on privacy is being analysed

in the context of a global information based society. In an age where information

technology governs virtually every aspect of our lives, the task before the Court is to
4
PART A


impart constitutional meaning to individual liberty in an interconnected world. While

we revisit the question whether our constitution protects privacy as an elemental

principle, the Court has to be sensitive to the needs of and the opportunities and

dangers posed to liberty in a digital world.
3      A Bench of three judges of this Court, while considering the constitutional

challenge to the Aadhaar card scheme of the Union government noted in its order

dated 11 August 2015 that the norms for and compilation of demographic biometric

data by government was questioned on the ground that it violates the right to privacy.

The Attorney General for India urged that the existence of a fundamental right of

privacy is in doubt in view of two decisions : the first – M P Sharma v Satish Chandra,

District Magistrate, Delhi1 (“M P Sharma”) was rendered by a Bench of eight

judges and the second, in Kharak Singh v State of Uttar Pradesh2 (“Kharak

Singh”) was rendered by a Bench of six judges. Each of these decisions, in the

submission of the Attorney General, contained observations that the Indian

Constitution does not specifically protect the right to privacy.
On the other hand, the

submission of the petitioners was that M P Sharma and Kharak Singh were founded

on principles expounded in
A K Gopalan v State of Madras3 (“Gopalan”
).
Gopalan,

which construed each provision contained in the Chapter on fundamental rights as

embodying a distinct protection, was held not to be good law by an eleven-judge
1
(1954) SCR 1077
2
(1964) 1 SCR 332
3
AIR 1950 SC 27
5
PART A


Bench in Rustom Cavasji Cooper v Union of India4 (“Cooper”). Hence the

petitioners submitted that the basis of the two earlier decisions is not valid. Moreover,

it was also urged that in the seven-judge Bench decision in Maneka Gandhi v Union

of India5 (“Maneka”), the minority judgment of Justice Subba Rao in Kharak Singh

was specifically approved of and the decision of the majority was overruled.



4      While addressing these challenges, the Bench of three judges of this Court took

note of several decisions of this Court in which the right to privacy has been held to

be a constitutionally protected fundamental right.
Those decisions include :
Gobind

v State of Madhya Pradesh6 (“Gobind”
),
R Rajagopal v State of Tamil Nadu7

(“Rajagopal”
) and People’s Union for Civil Liberties v Union of India8 (“PUCL”).

These subsequent decisions which affirmed the existence of a constitutionally

protected right of privacy, were rendered by Benches of a strength smaller than those

in M P Sharma and Kharak Singh. Faced with this predicament and having due

regard to the far-reaching questions of importance involving interpretation of the

Constitution, it was felt that institutional integrity and judicial discipline would require

a reference to a larger Bench. Hence the Bench of three learned judges observed in

its order dated 11 August 2015:
“12. We are of the opinion that the cases on hand raise far reaching
               questions of importance involving interpretation of the Constitution.
4
(1970) 1 SCC 248
5
(1978) 1 SCC 248
6
(1975) 2 SCC 148
7
(1994) 6 SCC 632
8
(1997) 1 SCC 301
6
PART A


             What is at stake is the amplitude of the fundamental rights including
             that precious and inalienable right under
Article 21.
If the
             observations made in
M.P. Sharma
(supra) and Kharak Singh
             (supra) are to be read literally and accepted as the law of this
             country, the fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution
             of India and more particularly right to liberty under
Article 21
would
             be denuded of vigour and vitality. At the same time, we are also of
             the opinion that the institutional integrity and judicial discipline
             require that pronouncement made by larger Benches of this Court
             cannot be ignored by the smaller Benches without appropriately
             explaining the reasons for not following the pronouncements made
             by such larger Benches. With due respect to all the learned Judges
             who rendered the subsequent judgments - where right to privacy is
             asserted or referred to their Lordships concern for the liberty of
             human beings, we are of the humble opinion that there appears to
             be certain amount of apparent unresolved contradiction in the law
             declared by this Court.
13. Therefore, in our opinion to give a quietus to the kind of
             controversy raised in this batch of cases once for all, it is better that
             the ratio decidendi of
M.P. Sharma
(supra) and Kharak Singh
             (supra) is scrutinized and the jurisprudential correctness of the
             subsequent decisions of this Court where the right to privacy is
             either asserted or referred be examined and authoritatively decided
             by a Bench of appropriate strength.”



5     On 18 July 2017, a Constitution Bench presided over by the learned Chief

Justice considered it appropriate that the issue be resolved by a Bench of nine judges.

The order of the Constitution Bench reads thus:
“During the course of the hearing today, it seems that it has become
             essential for us to determine whether there is any fundamental right
             of privacy under the Indian Constitution. The determination of this
             question would essentially entail whether the decision recorded by
             this Court in M.P. Sharma and Ors. vs. Satish Chandra, District
             Magistrate, Delhi and Ors. - 1950 SCR 1077 by an eight-Judge
             Constitution Bench, and also, in
Kharak Singh vs. The State of
             U.P. and Ors.
- 1962 (1) SCR 332 by a six-Judge Constitution
             Bench, that there is no such fundamental right, is the correct
             expression of the constitutional position.
7
PART A



             Before dealing with the matter any further, we are of the view that
             the issue noticed hereinabove deserves to be placed before the
             nine-Judge Constitution Bench. List these matters before the Nine-
             Judge Constitution Bench on 19.07.2017.”
6     During the course of hearing, we have been ably assisted on behalf of the

petitioners by Mr Gopal Subramanium, Mr Kapil Sibal, Mr Arvind Datar, Mr Shyam

Divan, Mr Anand Grover, Ms Meenakshi Arora, Mr Sajan Poovayya and Mr Jayant

Bhushan, learned senior counsel. Mr J S Attri, learned senior counsel supported them

on behalf of the State of Himachal Pradesh. On behalf of the Union of India, the Court

has had the benefit of the erudite submissions of Mr K K Venugopal, Attorney General

for India. He has been ably supported by Mr Tushar Mehta, Additional Solicitor

General, Mr Rakesh Dwivedi, senior counsel for the State of Gujarat, Mr Aryama

Sundaram for the State of Maharashtra, Mr Gopal Sankaranarayanan and Dr Arghya

Sengupta respectively. While some state governments have supported the stand of

the Union government, others have supported the petitioners.




7     The correctness of the decisions in M P Sharma and Kharak Singh, is to be

evaluated during the course of the reference. Besides, the jurisprudential correctness

of subsequent decisions holding the right to privacy to be a constitutionally protected

right is to be determined. The basic question whether privacy is a right protected

under our Constitution requires an understanding of what privacy means. For it is

when we understand what interests or entitlements privacy safeguards, that we can

determine whether the Constitution protects privacy. The contents of privacy need to
8
PART B


be analysed, not by providing an exhaustive enunciation or catalogue of what it

includes but by indicating its broad contours. The Court has been addressed on

various aspects of privacy including : (i) Whether there is a constitutionally protected

right to privacy; (ii) If there is a constitutionally protected right, whether this has the

character of an independent fundamental right or whether it arises from within the

existing guarantees of protected rights such as life and personal liberty; (iii) the

doctrinal foundations of the claim to privacy; (iv) the content of privacy; and (v) the

nature of the regulatory power of the state.
B         Decision in M P Sharma


8         An investigation was ordered by the Union government under the Companies
Act into the affairs of a company which was in liquidation on the ground that it had

made an organized attempt to embezzle its funds and to conceal the true state of its

affairs from the share-holders and on the allegation that the company had indulged in

fraudulent transactions and falsified its records. Offences were registered and search

warrants were issued during the course of which, records were seized. The challenge

was that the searches violated the fundamental rights of the petitioners under
Article

19(1)(f)
and
Article 20(3)
of the Constitution. The former challenge was rejected. The

question which this Court addressed was whether there was a contravention of
Article

20(3).
Article 20(3)
mandates that no person accused of an offence shall be compelled

to be a witness against himself. Reliance was placed on a judgment9 of the US
9
Boyd v. United States, 116 US 616 (1886)
9
PART B


Supreme Court holding that obtaining incriminating evidence by an illegal search and

seizure violates the Fourth and Fifth Amendments of the American Constitution. While

tracing the history of Indian legislation, this Court observed that provisions for search

were contained in successive enactments of the
Criminal Procedure Code
. Justice

Jagannadhadas, speaking for the Bench, held that a search or seizure does not

infringe the constitutional right guaranteed by
Article 20(3)
of the Constitution:
“…there is no basis in the Indian law for the assumption that a search
                  or seizure of a thing or document is in itself to be treated as compelled
                  production of the same. Indeed a little consideration will show that the
                  two are essentially different matters for the purpose relevant to the
                  present discussion. A notice to produce is addressed to the party
                  concerned and his production in compliance therewith constitutes a
                  testimonial act by him within the meaning of
Article 20(3)
as above
                  explained. But a search warrant is addressed to an officer of the
                  Government, generally a police officer. Neither the search nor the
                  seizure are acts of the occupier of the searched premises. They are
                  acts of another to which he is obliged to submit and are, therefore, not
                  his testimonial acts in any sense.”10



9         Having held that the guarantee against self-incrimination is not offended by a

search and seizure, the Court observed that :
“A power of search and seizure is in any system of jurisprudence
                  an overriding power of the State for the protection of social security
                  and that power is necessarily regulated by law. When the
                  Constitution makers have thought fit not to subject such
                  regulation to constitutional limitations by recognition of a
                  fundamental right to privacy, analogous to the Fourth
                  Amendment, we have no justification to import it, into a totally
                  different fundamental right, by some process of strained
                  construction. Nor is it legitimate to assume that the constitutional
10
MP Sharma (Supra note 1), at page 1096
10
PART C


                   protection under
Article 20(3)
would be defeated by the statutory
                   provisions for searches.”11               (emphasis supplied)



10         These observations – to be more precise in one sentence - indicating that the

Constitution makers did not subject the regulation by law of the power of search and

seizure to a fundamental right of privacy, similar to the Fourth amendment of the US

Constitution, have been pressed in aid to question the existence of a protected right

to privacy under our Constitution.
C          Decision in Kharak Singh


11         After being challaned in a case of dacoity in 1941, Kharak Singh was released
for want of evidence. But the police compiled a “history sheet” against him. ‘History

sheets’ were defined in
Regulation 228
of Chapter XX of the U P Police Regulations

as “the personal records of criminals under surveillance”. Kharak Singh, who was

subjected to regular surveillance, including midnight knocks, moved this Court for a

declaration that his fundamental rights were infringed.                Among the measures of

surveillance contemplated by
Regulation 236
were the following:
“(a) Secret picketing of the house or approaches to the houses of
                   suspects;
(b) domiciliary visits at night;
(c) thorough periodical inquiries by officers not below the rank of
                   sub-inspector into repute, habits, associations, income, expenses
                   and occupation;
(d) the reporting by constables and chaukidars of movements and
                   absences from home;
11
Ibid, at page 1096-97
11
PART C
(c) the verification of movements and absences by means of inquiry
                   slips;
(f) the collection and record on a history-sheet of all information
                   bearing on conduct.”


12         This Court held that the freedom to move freely throughout the territory of India,

guaranteed by
Article 19(1)(d)
was not infringed by a midnight knock on the door of

the petitioner since “his locomotion is not impeded or prejudiced in any manner”.



13         When the decision in Kharak Singh was handed down, the principles

governing the inter-relationship between the rights protected by
Article 19
and the

right to life and personal liberty under
Article 21
were governed by the judgment in

Gopalan. Gopalan considered each of the articles in the Chapter on fundamental

rights as embodying distinct (as opposed to over-lapping) freedoms. Hence in Kharak

Singh, the Court observed :
“In view of the very limited n