CASE: Satender Kumar Antil v CBI (2022)
SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/7148380/

[Cites
131
, Cited by
19037
]
Supreme Court of India
Satender Kumar Antil vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 11 July, 2022
Author:
M. M. Sundresh
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                            MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION NO.1849 OF 2021
                                                IN
                            SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO.5191 OF 2021




         SATENDER KUMAR ANTIL                                                     ... APPELLANT

                                                        VERSUS

         CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
         & ANR.                                                                   ... RESPONDENTS


                                                          WITH

                         MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION DIARY NO.29164 OF 2021
                                                IN
                            SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO.5191 OF 2021




                                                   JUDGMENT
M. M. SUNDRESH, J.
“Liberty is one of the most essential requirements of the modern man. It is
                            said to be the delicate fruit of a mature civilization. It is the very
                            quintessence of civilized existence and essential requirement of a modern
                            man”
- John E.E.D. in "Essays on Freedom and Power"
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHA SUNDRIYAL
Date: 2022.07.11
18:39:02 IST
Reason:
1
1. Taking note of the continuous supply of cases seeking bail after filing of the

   final report on a wrong interpretation of
Section 170
of the Code of Criminal

   Procedure (hereinafter referred to as “the Code” for short), an endeavour was

   made by this Court to categorize the types of offenses to be used as

   guidelines for the future. Assistance was sought from Shri Sidharth Luthra,

   learned senior counsel, and learned Additional Solicitor General Shri S.V.

   Raju. After allowing the application for intervention, an appropriate Order

   was passed on 07.10.2021. The same is reproduced as under:
“We have been provided assistance both by Mr. S.V. Raju, learned
          Additional Solicitor General and Mr. Sidharth Luthra, learned senior
          counsel and there is broad unanimity in terms of the suggestions made by
          learned ASG. In terms of the suggestions, the offences have been
          categorized and guidelines are sought to be laid down for grant of bail,
          without fettering the discretion of the courts concerned and keeping in mind
          the statutory provisions.
We are inclined to accept the guidelines and make them a part of the order
          of the Court for the benefit of the Courts below. The guidelines are as
          under:
Categories/Types of Offences
          A) Offences punishable with imprisonment of 7 years or less not falling in
          category B & D.
          B) Offences punishable with death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment
          for more than 7 years.
C) Offences punishable under Special Acts containing stringent provisions
          for bail like NDPS (
S.37
), PMLA (
S.45
), UAPA (S.43D(5), Companies Act,
          212(6), etc.
          D) Economic offences not covered by Special Acts.
REQUISITE CONDITIONS
1) Not arrested during investigation.
2) Cooperated throughout in the investigation including appearing before
          Investigating Officer whenever called.
2
(No need to forward such an accused along with the chargesheet (
Siddharth
Vs. State of UP
, 2021 SCC online SC 615)

                             CATEGORY A
After filing of chargesheet/complaint taking of cognizance
a) Ordinary summons at the 1st instance/including permitting appearance
through Lawyer.
b) If such an accused does not appear despite service of summons, then
Bailable Warrant for physical appearance may be issued.
c) NBW on failure to failure to appear despite issuance of Bailable Warrant.
d) NBW may be cancelled or converted into a Bailable Warrant/Summons
without insisting physical appearance of accused, if such an application is
moved on behalf of the accused before execution of the NBW on an
undertaking of the accused to appear physically on the next date/s of
hearing.
e) Bail applications of such accused on appearance may be decided w/o the
accused being taken in physical custody or by granting interim bail till the
bail application is decided.
CATEGORY B/D
On appearance of the accused in Court pursuant to process issued bail
application to be decided on merits.
CATEGORY C
Same as Category B & D with the additional condition of compliance of the
provisions of Bail under NDPS
S.37
,
45
PMLA, 212(6)
Companies Act
43
d(5) of UAPA, POSCO etc.”
Needless to say that the category A deals with both police cases and
complaint cases.
The trial Courts and the High Courts will keep in mind the aforesaid
guidelines while considering bail applications. The caveat which has been
put by learned ASG is that where the accused have not cooperated in the
investigation nor appeared before the Investigating Officers, nor answered
summons when the Court feels that judicial custody of the accused is
necessary for the completion of the trial, where further investigation
including a possible recovery is needed, the aforesaid approach cannot give
them benefit, something we agree with.
We may also notice an aspect submitted by Mr. Luthra that while issuing
notice to consider bail, the trial Court is not precluded from granting
interim bail taking into consideration the conduct of the accused during the
investigation which has not warranted arrest. On this aspect also we would
give our imprimatur and naturally the bail application to be ultimately
considered, would be guided by the statutory provisions.
3
The suggestions of learned ASG which we have adopted have categorized a
         separate set of offences as “economic Offences” not covered by the special
         Acts.
In this behalf, suffice to say on the submission of Mr. Luthra that this
         Court in
Sanjay Chandra vs. CBI
, (2012) 1 SCC 40 has observed in para 39
         that in determining whether to grant bail both aspects have to be taken into
         account:
a) seriousness of the charge and
b) severity of punishment.
Thus, it is not as if economic offences are completely taken out of the
         aforesaid guidelines but do form a different nature of offences and thus the
         seriousness of the charge has to be taken into account but simultaneously,
         the severity of the punishment imposed by the statute would also be a
         factor.
We appreciate the assistance given by the learned counsels and the positive
         approach adopted by the learned ASG.
The SLP stands disposed of and the matter need not be listed further.
         A copy of this order be circulated to the Registrars of the different High
         Courts to be further circulated to the trial Courts so that the unnecessary
         bail matters do not come up to this Court.
This is the only purpose for which we have issued these guidelines, but they
         are not fettered on the powers of the Courts.”
2. Two more applications, being M.A. No. 1849/2021 and M.A. Diary

  No.29164/2021, were filed seeking a clarification referring to category ‘C’

  wherein, inadvertently,
Section 45
of the Prevention of Money Laundering

  Act, 2002 despite being struck down, found a place, thus came the Order

  dated 16.12.2021:
“Learned senior counsels for parties state that they will endeavour to work
         out some of the fine tuning which is required to give meaning to the intent
         of our order dated 07.10.2021.
We make it clear that our intent was to ease the process of bail and not to
         restrict it. The order, in no way, imposes any additional fetters but is in
         furtherance of the line of judicial thinking to enlarge the scope of bail.
         At this stage, suffice for us to say that while referring to category ‘C’,
         inadvertently,
Section 45
of Prevention of Money laundering Act (PMLA)
         has been mentioned which has been struck down by this Court. Learned
         ASG states that an amendment was made and that is pending challenge
4
before this Court before a different Bench. That would be a matter to be
             considered by that Bench.
We are also putting a caution that merely by categorizing certain offences as
             economic offences which may be non-cognizable, it does not mean that a
             different meaning is to be given to our order.
We may also clarify that if during the course of investigation, there has been
             no cause to arrest the accused, merely because a charge sheet is filed, would
             not be an ipso facto cause to arrest the petitioner, an aspect in general
             clarified by us in Criminal Appeal No.838/2021 Siddharth v. State of Uttar
             Pradesh & Anr. dated 16.08.2021.”
3. Some        more      applications       have      been      filed     seeking       certain

   directions/clarifications, while impressing this Court to deal with the other

   aspects governing the grant of bail. We have heard Shri Amit Desai, learned

   senior counsel, Shri Sidharth Luthra, learned senior counsel, and learned

   Additional Solicitor General Shri S.V. Raju.
4. Having found that special leave petitions pertaining to different offenses,

   particularly on the rejection of bail applications are being filed before this

   Court, despite various directions issued from time to time, we deem it

   appropriate to undertake this exercise. We do make it clear that all our

   discussion along with the directions, are meant to act as guidelines, as each

   case pertaining to a bail application is obviously to be decided on its own

   merits.
PREVAILING SITUATION
5. Jails in India are flooded with undertrial prisoners. The statistics placed

   before us would indicate that more than 2/3rd of the inmates of the prisons
5
constitute undertrial prisoners. Of this category of prisoners, majority may

   not even be required to be arrested despite registration of a cognizable

   offense, being charged with offenses punishable for seven years or less. They

   are not only poor and illiterate but also would include women. Thus, there is

   a culture of offense being inherited by many of them. As observed by this

   Court, it certainly exhibits the mindset, a vestige of colonial India, on the part

   of the Investigating Agency, notwithstanding the fact arrest is a draconian

   measure resulting in curtailment of liberty, and thus to be used sparingly. In a

   democracy, there can never be an impression that it is a police State as both

   are conceptually opposite to each other.
DEFINITION OF TRIAL
6. The word ‘trial’ is not explained and defined under the Code. An extended

   meaning has to be given to this word for the purpose of enlargement on bail

   to include, the stage of investigation and thereafter. Primary considerations

   would obviously be different between these two stages. In the former stage,

   an arrest followed by a police custody may be warranted for a thorough

   investigation, while in the latter what matters substantially is the proceedings

   before the Court in the form of a trial. If we keep the above distinction in

   mind, the consequence to be drawn is for a more favourable consideration

   towards enlargement when investigation is completed, of course, among

   other factors.
6
7. Similarly, an appeal or revision shall also be construed as a facet of trial when

   it comes to the consideration of bail on suspension of sentence.


DEFINITION OF BAIL
8. The term “bail” has not been defined in the Code, though is used very often.

   A bail is nothing but a surety inclusive of a personal bond from the accused.

   It means the release of an accused person either by the orders of the Court or

   by the police or by the Investigating Agency.
9. It is a set of pre-trial restrictions imposed on a suspect while enabling any

   interference in the judicial process. Thus, it is a conditional release on the

   solemn undertaking by the suspect that he would cooperate both with the

   investigation and the trial. The word “bail” has been defined in the Black’s

   Law Dictionary, 9th Edn., pg. 160 as: -
“A security such as cash or a bond; esp., security required by a court for the release of
        a prisoner who must appear in court at a future time."
10.Wharton’s Law Lexicon, 14th Edn., pg. 105 defines bail as: -
“to set at liberty a person arrested or imprisoned, on security being taken for his
        appearance on a day and at a place certain, which security is called bail, because the
        party arrested or imprisoned is delivered into the hands of those who bind themselves
        or become bail for his due appearance when required, in order that he may be safely
        protected from prison, to which they have, if they fear his escape, etc., the legal power
        to deliver him."
BAIL IS THE RULE
11. The principle that bail is the rule and jail is the exception has been well

   recognised through the repetitive pronouncements of this Court. This again is
7
on the touchstone of
Article 21
of the Constitution of India. This court in
Nikesh Tarachand Shah v. Union of India
, (2018) 11 SCC 1, held that:
“19. In Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v. State of Punjab [Gurbaksh Singh
       Sibbia v. State of Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 465], the
       purpose of granting bail is set out with great felicity as follows: (SCC pp.
       586-88, paras 27-30)

            “27. It is not necessary to refer to decisions which deal with the right
            to ordinary bail because that right does not furnish an exact parallel to
            the right to anticipatory bail. It is, however, interesting that as long
            back as in 1924 it was held by the High Court of Calcutta
            in Nagendra Nath Chakravarti, In re [Nagendra Nath Chakravarti, In
            re, 1923 SCC OnLine Cal 318 : AIR 1924 Cal 476 : 1924 Cri LJ 732] ,
            AIR pp. 479-80 that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of
            the accused at the trial, that the proper test to be applied in the solution
            of the question whether bail should be granted or refused is whether it
            is probable that the party will appear to take his trial and that it is
            indisputable that bail is not to be withheld as a punishment. In two
            other cases which, significantly, are the “Meerut Conspiracy cases”
            observations are to be found regarding the right to bail which deserve
            a      special     mention.        In K.N.      Joglekar v. Emperor [K.N.
            Joglekar v. Emperor, 1931 SCC OnLine All 60 : AIR 1931 All 504 :
1932 Cri LJ 94] it was observed, while dealing with
Section 498
which corresponds to the present
Section 439
of the Code, that it
            conferred upon the Sessions Judge or the High Court wide powers to
            grant bail which were not handicapped by the restrictions in the
            preceding
Section 497
which corresponds to the present
Section 437
.
            It was observed by the Court that there was no hard-and-fast rule and
            no inflexible principle governing the exercise of the discretion
            conferred by
Section 498
and that the only principle which was
            established was that the discretion should be exercised judiciously.
In
Emperor v. H.L. Hutchinson [Emperor
v. H.L. Hutchinson, 1931
            SCC OnLine All 14 : AIR 1931 All 356 : 1931 Cri LJ 1271] , AIR p.
            358 it was said that it was very unwise to make an attempt to lay down
            any particular rules which will bind the High Court, having regard to
            the fact that the legislature itself left the discretion of the court
            unfettered. According to the High Court, the variety of cases that may
            arise from time to time cannot be safely classified and it is dangerous
            to make an attempt to classify the cases and to say that in particular
            classes a bail may be granted but not in other classes. It was observed
            that the principle to be deduced from the various sections in the
Criminal Procedure Code
was that grant of bail is the rule and refusal
            is the exception. An accused person who enjoys freedom is in a much
            better position to look after his case and to properly defend himself
            than if he were in custody. As a presumably innocent person he is
            therefore entitled to freedom and every opportunity to look after his
            own case. A presumably innocent person must have his freedom to
            enable him to establish his innocence.
8
28. Coming nearer home, it was observed by Krishna Iyer, J.,
      in Gudikanti Narasimhulu v. State [Gudikanti Narasimhulu v. State,
      (1978) 1 SCC 240 : 1978 SCC (Cri) 115] that: (SCC p. 242, para 1)

            ‘1. … the issue [of bail] is one of liberty, justice, public safety
            and burden of the public treasury, all of which insist that a
            developed jurisprudence of bail is integral to a socially
            sensitised judicial process. … After all, personal liberty of an
            accused or convict is fundamental, suffering lawful eclipse only
            in terms of “procedure established by law”. The last four words
            of
Article 21
are the life of that human right.’
29.
In
Gurcharan Singh v. State (UT of Delhi) [Gurcharan
      Singh
v. State (UT of Delhi), (1978) 1 SCC 118 : 1978 SCC (Cri) 41]
      it was observed by Goswami, J., who spoke for the Court, that: (SCC
      p. 129, para 29)

            ‘29. … There cannot be an inexorable formula in the matter of
            granting bail. The facts and circumstances of each case will
            govern the exercise of judicial discretion in granting or
            cancelling bail.’
30. In AMERICAN JURISPRUDENCE (2nd, Vol. 8, p. 806, para 39),
      it is stated:
‘Where the granting of bail lies within the discretion of the court, the
      granting or denial is regulated, to a large extent, by the facts and
      circumstances of each particular case. Since the object of the detention
      or imprisonment of the accused is to secure his appearance and
      submission to the jurisdiction and the judgment of the court, the
      primary inquiry is whether a recognizance or bond would effect that
      end.’

      It is thus clear that the question whether to grant bail or not depends
      for its answer upon a variety of circumstances, the cumulative effect
      of which must enter into the judicial verdict. Any one single
      circumstance cannot be treated as of universal validity or as
      necessarily justifying the grant or refusal of bail.”

               xxx                        xxx                    xxx
24.
Article 21
is the Ark of the Covenant so far as the Fundamental Rights
Chapter of the Constitution is concerned. It deals with nothing less
sacrosanct than the rights of life and personal liberty of the citizens of India
and other persons. It is the only article in the Fundamental Rights Chapter
(along with
Article 20
) that cannot be suspended even in an emergency [see
Article 359(1)
of the Constitution]. At present,
Article 21
is the repository of
a vast number of substantive and procedural rights post Maneka
Gandhi v. Union of India [Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, (1978) 1 SCC
248].”
9
12.Further this Court in
Sanjay Chandra v. CBI
(2012) 1 SCC 40, has

  observed that:
“21. In bail applications, generally, it has been laid down from t