CASE: Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v State of Maharashtra (1984)
SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/13149785/

[Cites
33
, Cited by
3286
]
Supreme Court of India
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda vs State Of Maharashtra on 17 July, 1984
Equivalent citations: AIR1984SC1622, (1984)86BOMLR536, 1984CRILJ1738, 1984(2)SCALE445, (1984)4SCC116, [1985]1SCR88
Bench:
A. Varadarajan
,
Syed M. Fazal Ali
,
Sabyasachi Mukharji
JUDGMENT
1. This is rather an unfortunate case where a marriage arranged and brought about through the intervention of common friends of the families of the bride and bridegroom though made a good start but ran into rough weather soon thereafter. The bride, Manju, entertained high hopes and aspirations and was not only hoping but was anxiously looking forward to a life full of mirth and merriment, mutual love and devotion between the two spouses. She appears to be an extremely emotional and sensitive girl and at the very behest cherished ideal dreams to be achieved after her marriage, which was solemnised, on Feb. 11, 1902 between her and the appellant, Sharad Birdhichand Sarda. Soon after the marriage, Manju left for her new marital home and started residing with the appellant in Takshila Apartments at Pune. Unfortunately, however, to her utter dismay and disappointment she found that the treatment of her husband and his parents towards her was cruel and harsh and her cherished dreams seem to have been shattered to pieces. Despite this shocking state of affairs she did not give in and kept hoping against hope and being of a very noble and magnanimous nature she was always willing to forgive and forget. As days passed by, despite her most laudable attitude she found that "things were not what they seem" and to quote her own words "she was treated in her husband's house as a labourer or as an unpaid maid-servant". She was made to do all sorts of odd jobs and despite her protests to her husband nothing seems to have happened. Evan so, Manju had such a soft and gentle frame of mind as never to complain to her parents-in-law, not even to her husband except sometimes. On finding things unbearable, she did protest, and expressed her feelings in clearest possible terms, in a fit of utter desperation and frustration, that he hated her. Not only this, when she narrated her woeful tale to her sister Anju in the letters Written to her (which would be dealt with in a later part of the judgment), she took the abundant care and caution of requesting Anju not to reveal her sad plight to her parents lest they, may get extremely upset, worried and distressed.
2. Ultimately, things came to such a pass that Manju was utterly disgusted and disheartened and she thought that a point of no-return had reached. At last, on the fateful morning of June 12, 1932, i.e., nearly four months after her marriage, she was found dead in her bed.
3. As to the cause of death, there appears to be a very serious divergence between the prosecution version and the defence case. The positive case of the prosecution was that as the appellant was not at all interested in her and bad illicit intimacy with another girl, Ujvala, he practically discarded his wife and when he found things to be unbearable he murdered hen between the night of June 11 and 12, 1982, and made a futile attempt to cremate the dead body. Ultimately, the matter was reported to the police. On the other hand, the plea of the defence was that while there was a strong possibility of Manju having been ill-treated and uncared for by her husband or her in-laws, being a highly sensitive and impressionate woman she committed suicide out of sheer depression and frustration arising from an emotional upsurge. This is the dominant issue which falls for decision by this Court.
4. Both the High Court and the trial Court rejected the theory of suicide and found that Manju was murdered by " her husband by administering her a strong dose of potassium cyanide and relied on the medical evidence as also that of the Chemical Examiner to show that it was a case of pore and simple homicide rather than that of suicide as alleged by tie defence. The High Court while confirming the judgment of the trial Court affirmed the death sentence and hence this appeal by special leave.
5. Before discussing the facts of the case, it may be mentioned that although the High Court and the trial Court have gone into meticulous and minutest matters pertaining to the circumstances leading to the alleged murder of Manju, yet after going through the judgments we feel that the facts of the case lie within a very narrow compass.
6. The story of this unfortunate girl starts on 11-2-1982 when her marriage was solemnised with the appellant preceded by a formal betrothal ceremony on 2-8-81, After the marriage, Manju, for the first time, went to her parents' house on 22-2-82 for a very short period and returned to Pune on 26-2-C2. It is the prosecution case that on 17-3-82 the appellant had called Manju at Pearl Hotel where he introduced her to Ujvala and told her that she must act according to the dictates and orders of Ujvala, if she wanted to lead a comfortable life with her husband. In other words, the suggestion was that the appellant made it clear to his wife that Ujvala was the. real mistress of the house and Manju was there Only to obey her orders After this incident, Manju went to her parents' house on 2-4-82 and returned to Pune on 12-4-82, This was her second Visit. The third and perhaps the last visit of Manju to her parents' house was on 25-5-82 from where she returned to Pune on 3-6-82, werever to return again. The reason for her return to Pune was that her father-in-law insisted that she should return to Pune because the betrothal ceremony of Shobha (sister of the appellant) was going to be held on 13-6-82,
7. The last step in this unfortunate drama was that Manju, accompanied by Anuradha (wife of A-2) and her children, returned to the flat on 11-6-82 near about 11.00 p. m. Her husband was not in the apartment at that time but it is alleged by the. prosecution that he returned soon after and administered potassium cyanide to Manju. Thereafter, the appellant went to his brother, Rameshwar who was also living in the same flat and brought Dr. Lodha (PW 24) who was living at a distance of 1 1/2 Kms. from Takshila Apartments. At the suggestion of Dr. Lodha, Dr. Gandhi (PW 25.) was also called and both of them found that Manju was dead and her death was an unnatural one and advised the body to be sent for post-mortem in order to determine the cause of death. Ultimately, Mohan Asava (PW 30) was approached on telephone and was informed that Manju had died at 5.30 a.m. Subsequently, the usual investigation and the post-mortem followed which are not very germane for our purpose at present and would be considered at the appropriate stage.
8. The plea of the appellant was that Manju was not administered potassium cyanide by him but she appears to have committed suicide out of shear frustration. In order to prove his bona fide the accused relied on the circumstances that as soon as he came to know about the death of his wife he called two Doctors (Pws 24 and 25) and when they declared that Manju had died an unnatural death, as the cause of death was not known, and therefore the body had. to be sent for post-mortem, he immediately took steps to inform the police. He flatly denied the allegation of the prosecution that there was any attempt on his part to persuade Mohan Asava (PW 30) to allow the body of the deceased to be cremated.
9. We might state that the High Court has mentioned as many as 17 circumstances in order to prove that the circumstantial evidence produced by the prosecution was complete and conclusive. Some of these circumstances overlap, some are irrelevant and some cannot be taken into consideration because they were not put to the appellant in his statement under
Section 313
of the CrPC in order to explain the effect of the same as we shall presently show.
The Jaw regarding the nature and character of proof of circumstantial evidence has been settled by several authorities of this Court as also of the High Courts. The locus classicus of the decision of this Court is the one rendered in the case of
Hanumant v. State of Madhya Pradesh
, where Mahajan, J. clearly expounded the various concomitants of the proof of a case based purely on circumstantial evidence, and pointed out thus:
The circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency and they should be such as to exclude every hypothesis but the one proposed to be proved...it must be such as to show that within all human probability the act must have been done by the accused." This decision was followed and endorsed by this Court in the case of Dharambir Singh v. State of Punjab Criminal Appeal No. 98 of 1958 decided on 4-11-58 printed on green papers in bound volumes.
We shall however discuss
Hanumant
's case fully in a later part of our judgment Coming now to the question of interpretation of
Section 32(1)
of the Evidence Act, this Court in the case of Ratan Gond v. State of Bihar , S.K. Das, J. made the following observations (at p. 21 of AIR):
'The only relevant clause of
Section 32
which may be said to have any bearing is clause (1) which relates to statements made by a person as to the cause of his death or as to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death. In the case before us, the statements made by Aghani do not relate to the cause of her death or to any of the circumstances relating to her death; on the contrary, the statements relate to the death of her sister." In the 'Law of Evidence' by Woodroffe & Ameer Ali, (Vol. II) the authors have collected all the cases at one place and indicated their conclusions thus:
To sum up, the test of the relevancy of a statement under
Section 32(1)
, is not whit the final finding in the case is but whether the cause of the death of the person making  the statement comes into question in the case. The expression 'any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death'; is wider in scope than the expression 'the cause of his death'; in other words, Clause (1) of
Section 32
refers to two kinds of statements: (1) statement made by a person as to the cause of his death, and (2) the statement made by a person as to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death.
The words 'resulted in his death' do not mean 'caused his death'. Thus, it is well settled that declarations are admissible Only in so far as they point directly to the fact constituting the res gestae of the homicide; that is to say, to the act of killing and to the circumstances immediately attendant thereon, like threats and difficulties, acts, declarations and incidents, which constitute or accompany and explain the fact or transaction in issue. They are admissible for or against either party, as forming parts of the res gestae." (P. 952)
 

It would appear that the solid foundation and the pivotal pillar on which rests the edifice of the prosecution may be indicated as follows:
(1) Written dying declaration by the deceased in her letters, two of which were addressed to her sister Anju and one to her friend Vahini.
(2) The oral statements made by the deceased to her father (PW 2), mother (PW 20), Sister (PW 6) and her friend (PW 3) and also to PWs 4 and 5 showing her state of mind shortly before her death and the complaints which she made regarding the ill-treatment by her husband.
(3) Evidence showing that the appellant was last seen with the deceased in the room until the matter was reported to the police.
(4) The unnatural and incriminating conduct of the appellant.
(5) The medical evidence taken along with the Report of the Chemical Examiner which demonstrably proves that it was a case of homicide, completely rules out the theory of suicide as alleged by the appellant. Mr. Jethmalani, learned Counsel for the appellant, has vehemently argued that there was a very strong possibility of the deceased having committed suicide due to the circumstances mentioned in her own letters. He has also questioned the legal admissibility of the statements contained in the written and oral dying declarations. He has submitted that the so-called dying declarations are admissible neither under
Section 32
nor under
Section 8
of the Evidence Act-
It was submitted by the appellant that the Present case is not at all covered by Clause (1) of
Section 32
of the Evidence Act.
11. The leading decision on this question, which has been endorsed by this Court, is the case of
Pakala Narayana Swami v. Emperor
, where Lord Atkin has laid down the following tests:
It has been suggested that the statement must be made after the transaction has taken place, that the person making it must be at any rate near death, that the "circumstances" can only include the acts done when and where the death was caused. Their Lordships are of opinion that the natural meaning of the words used does not convey any of these limitations. The statement may be made before the cause of death has arisen, or before the deceased has any reason to anticipate being killed. The circumstances must be circumstances of the transaction; general expressions indicating fear or suspicion whether of a particular individual or otherwise and not directly related to the occasion of the death will not be admissible.... Circumstances of the transaction" is a phrase no doubt that conveys some limitations. It is not as broad as the analogous use in "circumstantial evidence" which includes evidence of all relevant facts. It is on the other hand narrower than "res gestae" Circumstances must have some proximate relation to the actual occurrence.... It will be observed that "the circumstances are of the transaction which resulted in the death of the declarant." These principles were followed and fully endorsed by a decision of this Court in Shiv Kumar v. State of Uttar Pradesh (Crl. Appeal No. 55 of 1966 decided on 29-7-66 : (reported in 1966 Cri App R (SC) 281)). where the following observations were made:
It is clear that if the statement of the deceased is to be admissible under this section it must be a statement relating to the circumstances of the transaction resulting in his death. The statement may be made before the cause of death has arisen, or before the deceased has any reason to anticipate being killed,.... A necessary condition of admissibility under the section is that the circumstance must have some proximate relation to the actual occurrence.... The phrase "circumstances of the transaction" is a phrase that no doubt conveys some limitations. It is not as broad as the analogous use in "circumstantial evidence" which includes evidence of all relevant facts. It is on the other hand narrower than "res gestae" (See Pakala Narayana Swaraj v. King Emperor AIR 1939 PC 47.
The aforesaid principles have been followed by a long catena of authorities of almost all the Courts which have been noticed in this case. To mention only a few important ones, in
Manohar Lal v. State of Punjab
1981 Cri LJ 1373, the Division Bench of the Punjab & Haryana High Court observed thus:
The torture administered sometimes manifests itself in various forms. To begin with, it might be mental torture and then it may assume the form of physical torture. The physical harm done to the victim might be increased from stage to stage to have the desired effect. The fatal assault might be made after a considerable interval of time, but if the circumstances of the torture appearing in the writings of the deceased come into existence after the initiation of the torture the same would be held to be relevant as
laid down in
Section 32(1)
of the Evidence Act.
12. We fully agree with the above observations made by the learned Judges, In Protima Dutta v. The State , while relying on
Hanumant
's case (supra) the Calcutta High Court has clearly pointed out the nature and limits of the doctrine of proximity and has observed that in some cases where there is a sustained cruelty, the proximity may extend even to a period of three years. In this connection, the High Court observed thus:
The 'transaction' in this case is systematic ill-treatment for years since the marriage of Sumana with incitement to end her life. Circumstances of the transaction includes evidence of cruelty which produces a state of mind favourable to suicide. Although that would not by itself be sufficient unless there was evidence of incitement to end her life it would be relevant as evidence.
This observation taken as a whole would, in my view, imply that the time factor is not always a criterion in determining whether the piece of evidence is properly included within "circumstances of transaction".... "In that case the allegation was that there was sustained cruelty extending over a period of three years interspersed with exhortation to the victim to end her life". His Lordship further observed and held that the evidence of cruelty was one continuous chain, several links of which were touched up by the exhortations to die. "Thus evidence of. cruelty, ill-treatment and exhortation to end her life adduced in the case must be held admissible, together with the statement of Nilima (who committed suicide) in that regard which related to the circumstances terminating in suicide.
13. Similarly, in
Onkar v. State of Madhya Pradesh
1974 Cri LJ 1200 (Madhya Pradesh), while following the decision of the Privy Council in
Pakala Narayana Swami
's case"  (supra), the Madhya Pradesh High Court has explained the nature of the circumstances contemplated by
Section 32
of the Evidence Act thus:
The circumstances must have some proximate relation to the actual occurrence and they can only include the acts done when and where the death was caused.... Thus a statement merely suggesting motive for a crime cannot be admitted in evidence unless it is so intimately connected with the transaction itself as to be a circumstance of the transaction. In the instant case evidence has been led about statements made by the deceased long before this incident which may suggest motive for the crime.
14.
In
Allijan Munshi v. State
AIR 1960 Bom 290, the Bombay High Court has taken a similar view.
15. In Chinnavalayan v. State of Madras (1959) 1 Mad LJ 246, two eminent Judges of the Madras High Court while dealing with the connotation of the word 'circumstances' observed thus:
The special circumstance permitted to transgress the time factor is, for example, a case of prolonged poisoning, while the special circumstance permitted to transgress the distance factor is, for example, a case of decoying with intent to murder. This is because the natural meaning of the words, according to their Lordships, do not convey any of the limitations such as (1) that the statement must be made after the transaction has taken place, (2) that the person making it must be at any rate near death, (3) that the circumstances can only include acts done when and. where the death was caused. But the circumstances must be circumstances of the transaction and they must have some proximate relation to the actual occurrence.
16.
In
Gokul Chandra Chatterjee v. The State
, the Calcutta High Court has somewhat diluted, the real concept of proximity and observed thus;
In the present case, it cannot be said that statements in. the letters have no relation to the cause of death. What drove her to kill herself was undoubtedly her unhappy state of mind, but the statements in my view have not that proximate relation to the actual occurrence as to make them admissible under
Section 32(1)
, Evidence Act They cannot be said to be circumstances of the transaction which resulted in death.
17. We, however, do not approve of the observations made by the High Court in view of the clear decision of this Court and that of the Privy Council. With due respect, the High Court has not properly interpreted the tenor and the spirit of the ratio
laid down by
the Privy Council. We are, therefore, of the opinion that this ease does not lay do